ArticleTitle	Question	Answer	DifficultyFromQuestioner	DifficultyFromAnswerer	ArticleFile
Alessandro_Volta	Was Volta an Italian physicist?	yes	easy	easy	d

TalkEnglish Logo
Toggle English Lesson Menu
TalkEnglish Home Button
Lesson Search

    ENGLISH LESSONS

    Speaking English Lessons
    English Video Lessons
    English Listening Lessons
    Extra English Lessons
    Full Lesson Index
    EXTRAS
    English Speaking Articles
    Download Offline Version
    Apps for Android and iPhones
    FB	TW	


Play / pause

    Listen to the Entire Lesson

0:00
0:00
volume
< previous
> next
How is your day - Example Conversation
Listen to the Entire Lesson

The present tense is more common in writing. As you can see by all the explanations I am giving, they are all written in the present tense. That is because it is instructional. Instructional writing is more commonly written in present tense. However, stories in novels are written in past tense.

Negotiation
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
For other uses, see Negotiation (disambiguation).
Alternative dispute resolution
or External dispute resolution

    Arbitration Conciliation Mediation Negotiation Collaborative law Conflict resolution Dispute resolution Lawyer-supported mediation Party-directed mediation Restorative justice

    vte

Signing the Treaty of Trianon on 4 June 1920. Albert Apponyi standing in the middle.
The ministers of foreign affairs of the United States, the United Kingdom, Russia, Germany, France, China, the European Union and Iran negotiating in Lausanne for a Comprehensive agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme (30 March 2015).

Negotiation is a dialogue between two or more people or parties intended to reach a beneficial outcome over one or more issues where a conflict exists with respect to at least one of these issues. Negotiation is an interaction and process between entities who compromise to agree on matters of mutual interest, while optimizing their individual utilities.[1] This beneficial outcome can be for all of the parties involved, or just for one or some of them. Negotiators need to understand negotiation process and other negotiators to increase their chances to close deals, avoid conflicts, establishing relationship with other parties and gain profit.[1]

It is aimed to resolve points of difference, to gain advantage for an individual or collective, or to craft outcomes to satisfy various interests. It is often conducted by putting forward a position and making concessions to achieve an agreement. The degree to which the negotiating parties trust each other to implement the negotiated solution is a major factor in determining whether negotiations are successful.

People negotiate daily, often without considering it a negotiation.[2][3][page needed] Negotiation occurs in organizations, including businesses, non-profits, and within and between governments as well as in sales and legal proceedings, and in personal situations such as marriage, divorce, parenting, etc. Professional negotiators are often specialized, such as union negotiators, leverage buyout negotiators, peace negotiator, or hostage negotiators. They may also work under other titles, such as diplomats, legislators, or brokers. There is also negotiation conducted by algorithms or machines known as autonomous negotiation.[4][1][5] For automation, the negotiation participants and process have to be modeled correctly.[6]
Contents

    1 Types
        1.1 Distributive negotiation
        1.2 Integrative negotiation
        1.3 Stages in the negotiation process
        1.4 Integrated negotiation
        1.5 Bad faith
    2 Negotiation Pie
    3 Strategies
        3.1 Employing an advocate
        3.2 BATNA
        3.3 Conflict styles
        3.4 Types of negotiators
        3.5 Tactics
        3.6 Nonverbal communication
            3.6.1 Examples
        3.7 Barriers
    4 Emotion
        4.1 Affect effect
        4.2 Positive affect
        4.3 Negative affect
        4.4 Conditions for emotion affect
        4.5 Effect of partner's emotions
        4.6 Dealing with emotions
        4.7 Problems with laboratory studies
    5 Group composition
        5.1 Multi-party
        5.2 Team
        5.3 Women
        5.4 Academic negotiation
    6 Etymology
    7 See also
    8 References
    9 Further reading

Types

Negotiation can take a wide variety of forms, from a multilateral conference of all United Nations members to establish a new international norm (such as the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea) to a meeting of parties to a conflict to end violence or resolve the underlying issue (such as constitutional negotiations in South Africa in 1990-1994 or in Colombia with the FARC in 2012-2015) to a business encounter to make a deal to a face-off between parents (or between parent and child) over the child's proper behavior.[7] Mediation is a form of negotiation with a third-party catalyst who helps the conflicting parties negotiate when they cannot do so by themselves. Negotiation can be contrasted with arbitration, where the decision lies with the third party, which the conflicting parties are committed to accept.

Negotiation theorists generally distinguish between two types of negotiation[8] The difference in the usage of the two type depends on the mindset of the negotiator but also on the situation: one-off encounters where lasting relationships do not obtain are more likely to produce distributive negotiations whereas lasting relationships are more likely to require integrative negotiating[9] Different theorists use different labels for the two general types and distinguish them in different ways.
Distributive negotiation
See also: Zero-sum game

Distributive negotiation is also sometimes called positional or hard-bargaining negotiation and attempts to distribute a "fixed pie" of benefits. Distributive negotiation operates under zero-sum conditions and implies that any gain one party makes is at the expense of the other and vice versa. For this reason, distributive negotiation is also sometimes called win-lose because of the assumption that one person's gain is another person's loss. Distributive negotiation examples include haggling prices on an open market, including the negotiation of the price of a car or a home.

In a distributive negotiation, each side often adopts an extreme or fixed position, knowing it will not be accepted—and then seeks to cede as little as possible before reaching a deal. Distributive bargainers conceive of negotiation as a process of distributing a fixed amount of value. A distributive negotiation often involves people who have never had a previous interactive relationship, nor are they likely to do so again in the near future, although all negotiations usually have a distributive element.

In the distributive approach each negotiator fights for the largest possible piece of the pie, so parties tend to regard each other more as an adversary than a partner and to take a harder line.[10] Since Prospect Theory indicates that people value losses more than gains and are more risk-averse about losses, concession-convergence bargaining is likely to be more acrimonious and less productive of an agreement[11]
Integrative negotiation
See also: Non-zero-sum game and Win-win game

Integrative negotiation is also called interest-based, merit-based, or principled negotiation. It is a set of techniques that attempts to improve the quality and likelihood of negotiated agreement by taking advantage of the fact that different parties often value various outcomes differently.[12] While distributive negotiation assumes there is a fixed amount of value (a "fixed pie") to be divided between the parties, integrative negotiation attempts to create value in the course of the negotiation ("expand the pie") by either "compensating" loss of one item with gains from another ("trade-offs" or logrolling), or by constructing or reframing the issues of the conflict in such a way that both parties benefit ("win-win" negotiation).[13]

However, even integrative negotiation is likely to have some distributive elements, especially when the different parties both value different items to the same degree or when details are left to be allocated at the end of the negotiation. While concession is mandatory for negotiations, research shows that people who concede more quickly, are less likely to explore all integrative and mutually beneficial solutions. Therefore, early conceding reduces the chance of an integrative negotiation.[14]

Integrative negotiation often involves a higher degree of trust and the formation of a relationship. It can also involve creative problem-solving that aims to achieve mutual gains. It sees a good agreement as not one with maximum individual gain, but one that provides optimum gain for all parties. Gains in this scenario are not at the expense of the Other, but with it. Each seeks to accord the Other enough benefit that it will hold to the agreement that gives the first party an agreeable outcome, and vice versa.

Productive negotiation focuses on the underlying interests of the parties rather than their starting positions, approaches negotiation as a shared problem-solving rather than a personalized battle, and insists upon adherence to objective, principled criteria as the basis for agreement.[15]
Stages in the negotiation process

However, negotiators need not sacrifice effective negotiation in favor of a positive relationship between parties. Rather than conceding, each side can appreciate that the other has emotions and motivations of their own and use this to their advantage in discussing the issue. In fact, perspective-taking can help move parties toward a more integrative solution. Fisher et al. illustrate a few techniques that effectively improve perspective-taking in their book Getting to Yes, and through the following, negotiators can separate people from the problem itself.

    Put yourself in their shoes – People tend to search for information that confirms his or her own beliefs and often ignore information that contradicts prior beliefs. In order to negotiate effectively, it is important to empathize with the other party's point of view. One should be open to other views and attempt to approach an issue from the perspective of the other.
    Discuss each other's perceptions – A more direct approach to understanding the other party is to explicitly discuss each other's perceptions. Each individual should openly and honestly share his or her perceptions without assigning blame or judgement to the other.
    Find opportunities to act inconsistently with his or her views – It is possible that the other party has prior perceptions and expectations about the other side. The other side can act in a way that directly contradicts those preconceptions, which can effectively send a message that the party is interested in an integrative negotiation.
    Face-saving – This approach refers to justifying a stance based on one's previously expressed principles and values in a negotiation. This approach to an issue is less arbitrary, and thus, it is more understandable from the opposing party's perspective.[16]

Additionally, negotiators can use certain communication techniques to build a stronger relationship and develop more meaningful negotiation solution.

    Active listening – Listening is more than just hearing what the other side is saying. Active listening involves paying close attention to what is being said verbally and nonverbally. It involves periodically seeking further clarification from the person. By asking the person exactly what they mean, they may realize you are not simply walking through a routine, but rather take them seriously.
    Speak for a purpose – Too much information can be as harmful as too little. Before stating an important point, determine exactly what you wish you communicate to the other party. Determine the exact purpose that this shared information will serve.[16]

Integrated negotiation

Integrated negotiation is a strategic approach to influence that maximizes value in any single negotiation through the astute linking and sequencing of other negotiations and decisions related to one's operating activities.

This approach in complex settings is best executed by mapping out all potentially relevant negotiations, conflicts and operating decisions in order to integrate helpful connections among them, while minimizing any potentially harmful connections (see examples below).

Integrated negotiation is not to be confused with integrative negotiation, a different concept (as outlined above) related to a non-zero-sum approach to creating value in negotiations.

Integrated negotiation was first identified and labeled by international negotiator and author Peter Johnston in his book Negotiating with Giants.[17]

One of the examples cited in Johnston's book is that of J. D. Rockefeller deciding where to build his first major oil refinery. Instead of taking the easier, cheaper route from the oil fields to refine his petroleum in Pittsburgh, Rockefeller chose to build his refinery in Cleveland. Why? Because rail companies would be transporting his refined oil to market. Pittsburgh had just one major railroad, meaning it could dictate prices in negotiations, while Cleveland had three railroads that Rockefeller knew would compete for his business, potentially reducing his costs significantly. The leverage gained in these rail negotiations more than offset the additional operating costs of sending his oil to Cleveland for refining, helping establish Rockefeller's empire, while undermining his competitors who failed to integrate their core operating decisions with their negotiation strategies.[18]

Other examples of integrated negotiation include the following:

    In sports, athletes in the final year of their contracts will ideally hit peak performance so they can negotiate robust, long-term contracts in their favor.[19]
    A union needs to negotiate and resolve any significant internal conflicts to maximize its collective clout before going to the table to negotiate a new contract with management.
    If purchases for similar goods or services are occurring independent of one another across different government departments, recognizing this and consolidating orders into one large volume purchase can help create buying leverage and cost-savings in negotiations with suppliers.
    A tech start-up looking to negotiate being bought out by a larger industry player in the future can improve its odds of that happening by ensuring, wherever possible, that its systems, technology, competencies and culture are as compatible as possible with those of its most likely buyer.[20]
    A politician negotiating support for a presidential run may want to avoid bringing onboard any high-profile supporters who risk alienating other important potential supporters, while avoiding any unexpected new policies that could also limit the size of their growing coalition.[21]

Bad faith

When a party pretends to negotiate, but secretly has no intention of compromising, the party is considered negotiating in bad faith. Bad faith is a concept in negotiation theory whereby parties pretend to reason to reach settlement, but have no intention to do so, for example, one political party may pretend to negotiate, with no intention to compromise, for political effect.[22][23]

Bad faith negotiations are often used in political science and political psychology to refer to negotiating strategies in which there is no real intention to reach compromise, or a model of information processing.[24] The "inherent bad faith model" of information processing is a theory in political psychology that was first put forth by Ole Holsti to explain the relationship between John Foster Dulles' beliefs and his model of information processing.[25] It is the most widely studied model of one's opponent.[26] A state is presumed implacably hostile, and contra-indicators of this are ignored. They are dismissed as propaganda ploys or signs of weakness. Examples are John Foster Dulles' position regarding the Soviet Union, or Hamas's position on the state of Israel.[26][neutrality is disputed]
Negotiation Pie

The total of advantages and disadvantages to be distributed in a negotiation is illustrated with the term negotiation pie.[27] The course of the negotiation can either lead to an increase, shrinking, or stagnation of these values. If the negotiation parties are able to expand the total pie a win-win situation is possible assuming that both parties profit from the expansion of the pie. In practice, however, this maximisation approach is oftentimes impeded by the so-called small pie bias, i.e. the psychological underestimation of the negotiation pie's size. Likewise, the possibility to increase the pie may be underestimated due to the so-called incompatibility bias.[28] Contrary to enlarging the pie, the pie may also shrink during negotiations e.g. due to (excessive) negotiation costs.[28]
Strategies

There are many different ways to categorize the essential elements of negotiation.

One view of negotiation involves three basic elements: process, behavior and substance. The process refers to how the parties negotiate: the context of the negotiations, the parties to the negotiations, the tactics used by the parties, and the sequence and stages in which all of these play out. Behavior refers to the relationships among these parties, the communication between them and the styles they adopt. The substance refers to what the parties negotiate over: the agenda, the issues (positions and – more helpfully – interests), the options, and the agreement(s) reached at the end.[citation needed]

Another view of negotiation comprises four elements: strategy, process, tools, and tactics. Strategy comprises the top level goals – typically including relationship and the final outcome. Processes and tools include the steps to follow and roles to take in preparing for and negotiating with the other parties. Tactics include more detailed statements and actions and responses to others' statements and actions. Some add to this persuasion and influence, asserting that these have become integral to modern day negotiation success, and so should not be omitted.[citation needed]
Employing an advocate

A skilled negotiator may serve as an advocate for one party to the negotiation. The advocate attempts to obtain the most favorable outcomes possible for that party. In this process the negotiator attempts to determine the minimum outcome(s) the other party is (or parties are) willing to accept, then adjusts their demands accordingly. A "successful" negotiation in the advocacy approach is when the negotiator is able to obtain all or most of the outcomes their party desires, but without driving the other party to permanently break off negotiations.

Skilled negotiators may use a variety of tactics ranging from negotiation hypnosis,[citation needed] to a straightforward presentation of demands or setting of preconditions, to more deceptive approaches such as cherry picking. Intimidation and salami tactics may also play a part in swaying the outcome of negotiations.[citation needed]

Another negotiation tactic is bad guy/good guy. Bad guy/good guy is when one negotiator acts as a bad guy by using anger and threats. The other negotiator acts as a good guy by being considerate and understanding. The good guy blames the bad guy for all the difficulties while trying to get concessions and agreement from the opponent.[29]
BATNA

The best alternative to a negotiated agreement, or BATNA, is the most advantageous alternative course of action a negotiator can take should the current negotiation end without reaching agreement. The quality of a BATNA has the potential to improve a party's negotiation outcome. Understanding one's BATNA can empower an individual and allow him or her to set higher goals when moving forward.[30] Alternatives need to be actual and actionable to be of value.[31] Negotiators may also consider the other party's BATNA and how it compares to what they are offering during the negotiation.[32][page needed]
Conflict styles

Kenneth W. Thomas identified five styles or responses to negotiation.[33][34] These five strategies have been frequently described in the literature and are based on the dual-concern model.[35] The dual concern model of conflict resolution is a perspective that assumes individuals' preferred method of dealing with conflict is based on two themes or dimensions:[36]

    A concern for self (i.e., assertiveness), and
    A concern for others (i.e., empathy).

Based on this model, individuals balance the concern for personal needs and interests with the needs and interests of others. The following five styles can be used based on individuals' preferences depending on their pro-self or pro-social goals. These styles can change over time, and individuals can have strong dispositions towards numerous styles.

Accommodating
    Individuals who enjoy solving the other party's problems and preserving personal relationships. Accommodators are sensitive to the emotional states, body language, and verbal signals of the other parties. They can, however, feel taken advantage of in situations when the other party places little emphasis on the relationship. Accommodation is a passive but prosocial approach to conflict. People solve both large and small conflicts by giving in to the demands of others. Sometimes, they yield because they realize that their position is in error, so they agree with the viewpoint adopted by others. In other cases, however, they may withdraw their demands without really being convinced that the other side is correct, but for the sake of group unity or in the interest of time--they withdraw all complaints. Thus, yielding can reflect either genuine conversion or superficial compliance.
Avoiding
    Individuals who do not like to negotiate and don't do it unless warranted. When negotiating, avoiders tend to defer and dodge the confrontational aspects of negotiating; however, they may be perceived as tactful and diplomatic. Inaction is a passive means of dealing with disputes. Those who avoid conflicts adopt a "wait and see" attitude, hoping that problems will solve themselves. Avoiders often tolerate conflicts, allowing them to simmer without doing anything to minimize them. Rather than openly discussing disagreements, people who rely on avoidance change the subject, skip meetings, or even leave the group altogether (Bayazit & Mannix, 2003). Sometimes they simply agree to disagree (a modus vivendi).
Collaborating
    Individuals who enjoy negotiations that involve solving tough problems in creative ways. Collaborators are good at using negotiations to understand the concerns and interests of the other parties. Collaborating is an active, pro-social, and pro-self approach to conflict resolution. Collaborating people identify the issues underlying the dispute and then work together to identify a solution that is satisfying to both sides. This orientation, which is also described as collaboration, problem solving, or a win-win orientation, entreats both sides in the dispute to consider their opponent's outcomes as well as their own[37]
Competing
    Individuals who enjoy negotiations because they present an opportunity to win something. Competitive negotiators have strong instincts for all aspects of negotiating and are often strategic. Because their style can dominate the bargaining process, competitive negotiators often neglect the importance of relationships. Competing is an active, pro-self means of dealing with conflict that involves forcing others to accept one's view. Those who use this strategy tend to see conflict as a win-lose situation and so use competitive, powerful tactics to intimidate others. Fighting (forcing, dominating, or contending) can take many forms, including authoritative mandate, challenges, arguing, insults, accusations, complaining, vengeance, and even physical violence (Morrill, 1995). These conflict resolution methods are all contentious ones because they involve imposing one's solution on the other party.
Compromising
    Individuals who are eager to close the deal by doing what is fair and equal for all parties involved in the negotiation. Compromisers can be useful when there is limited time to complete the deal; however, compromisers often unnecessarily rush the negotiation process and make concessions too quickly.

Types of negotiators

Three basic kinds of negotiators have been identified by researchers involved in The Harvard Negotiation Project. These types of negotiators are: soft bargainers, hard bargainers, and principled bargainers.

Soft
    These people see negotiation as too close to competition, so they choose a gentle style of bargaining. The offers they make are not in their best interests, they yield to others' demands, avoid confrontation, and they maintain good relations with fellow negotiators. Their perception of others is one of friendship, and their goal is agreement. They do not separate the people from the problem, but are soft on both. They avoid contests of wills and insist on agreement, offering solutions and easily trusting others and changing their opinions.
Hard
    These people use contentious strategies to influence, utilizing phrases such as "this is my final offer" and "take it or leave it." They make threats, are distrustful of others, insist on their position, and apply pressure to negotiate. They see others as adversaries and their ultimate goal is victory. Additionally, they search for one single answer, and insist you agree on it. They do not separate the people from the problem (as with soft bargainers), but they are hard on both the people involved and the problem.
Principled
    Individuals who bargain this way seek integrative solutions, and do so by sidestepping commitment to specific positions. They focus on the problem rather than the intentions, motives, and needs of the people involved. They separate the people from the problem, explore interests, avoid bottom lines, and reach results based on standards independent of personal will. They base their choices on objective criteria rather than power, pressure, self-interest, or an arbitrary decisional procedure. These criteria may be drawn from moral standards, principles of fairness, professional standards, and tradition.

Researchers from The Harvard Negotiation Project recommend that negotiators explore a number of alternatives to the problems they face in order to reach the best solution, but this is often not the case (as when you may be dealing with an individual using soft or hard bargaining tactics) (Forsyth, 2010).
Tactics

Tactics are always an important part of the negotiating process. More often than not they are subtle, difficult to identify and used for multiple purposes. Tactics are more frequently used in distributive negotiations and when the focus in on taking as much value off the table as possible.[38] Many negotiation tactics exist. Below are a few commonly used tactics.

Auction: The bidding process is designed to create competition.[39] When multiple parties want the same thing, pit them against one another. When people know that they may lose out on something, they want it even more. Not only do they want the thing that is being bid on, they also want to win, just to win. Taking advantage of someone's competitive nature can drive up the price.

Brinksmanship: One party aggressively pursues a set of terms to the point where the other negotiating party must either agree or walk away. Brinkmanship is a type of "hard nut" approach to bargaining in which one party pushes the other party to the "brink" or edge of what that party is willing to accommodate. Successful brinksmanship convinces the other party they have no choice but to accept the offer and there is no acceptable alternative to the proposed agreement.[40]

Bogey: Negotiators use the bogey tactic to pretend that an issue of little or no importance is very important.[41] Then, later in the negotiation, the issue can be traded for a major concession of actual importance.

Calling a higher authority: To mitigate too far reaching concessions, deescalate, or overcome a deadlock situation, one party makes the further negotiation process dependent on the decision of a decision maker, not present at the negotiation table.[42]

Chicken: Negotiators propose extreme measures, often bluffs, to force the other party to chicken out and give them what they want. This tactic can be dangerous when parties are unwilling to back down and go through with the extreme measure.

Defence in Depth: Several layers of decision-making authority is used to allow further concessions each time the agreement goes through a different level of authority.[43] In other words, each time the offer goes to a decision maker, that decision maker asks to add another concession to close the deal.

Deadlines: Give the other party a deadline forcing them to make a decision. This method uses time to apply pressure to the other party. Deadlines given can be actual or artificial.

Flinch: Flinching is showing a strong negative physical reaction to a proposal. Common examples of flinching are gasping for air, or a visible expression of surprise or shock. The flinch can be done consciously or unconsciously.[44] The flinch signals to the opposite party that you think the offer or proposal is absurd in hopes the other party will lower their aspirations.[45] Seeing a physical reaction is more believable than hearing someone saying, "I'm shocked."

Good Guy/Bad Guy: Within the tactic of good guy/bad guy (synonyms are good cop/bad cop or black hat/white hat) oftentimes positive and unpleasant tasks are divided between two negotiators on the same negotiation side or unpleasant tasks or decisions are allocated to an (real or fictitious) outsider. The good guy supports the conclusion of the contract and emphasises positive aspects of the negotiation (mutual interests). The bad guy criticises negative aspects (opposing interests). The division of the two roles allows more consistent behaviour and credibility of the individual negotiators. As the good guy promotes the contract, he/she can build trust with the other side.[46]

Highball/Lowball or Ambit claim: Depending on whether selling or buying, sellers or buyers use a ridiculously high, or ridiculously low opening offer that is not achievable. The theory is that the extreme offer makes the other party reevaluate their own opening offer and move close to the resistance point (as far as you are willing to go to reach an agreement).[47] Another advantage is that the party giving the extreme demand appears more flexible when they make concessions toward a more reasonable outcome. A danger of this tactic is that the opposite party may think negotiating is a waste of time.

The Nibble: Also known under salami tactic or quivering quill, nibbling is the demand of proportionally small concessions that haven't been discussed previously just before closing the deal.[41] This method takes advantage of the other party's desire to close by adding "just one more thing."

Snow Job: Negotiators overwhelm the other party with so much information that they have difficulty determining what information is important, and what is a diversion.[48] Negotiators may also use technical language or jargon to mask a simple answer to a question asked by a non-expert.

Mirroring: When people get on well, the outcome of a negotiation is likely to be more positive. To create trust and a rapport, a negotiator may mimic or mirror the opponent's behavior and repeat what they say. Mirroring refers to a person repeating the core content of what another person just said, or repeating a certain expression. It indicates attention to the subject of negotiation and acknowledges the other party's point or statement.[49] Mirroring can help create trust and establish a relationship.
Nonverbal communication
Main article: Nonverbal communication

Communication is a key element of negotiation. Effective negotiation requires that participants effectively convey and interpret information. Participants in a negotiation communicate information not only verbally but non-verbally through body language and gestures. By understanding how nonverbal communication works, a negotiator is better equipped to interpret the information other participants are leaking non-verbally while keeping secret those things that would inhibit his/her ability to negotiate.[50]
Examples

Non-verbal "anchoring" In a negotiation, a person can gain the advantage by verbally expressing a position first. By anchoring one's position, one establishes the position from which the negotiation proceeds. In a like manner, one can "anchor" and gain advantage with nonverbal (body language) cues.

    Personal space: The person at the head of the table is the apparent symbol of power. Negotiators can negate this strategic advantage by positioning allies in the room to surround that individual.
    First impression: Begin the negotiation with positive gestures and enthusiasm. Look the person in the eye with sincerity. If you cannot maintain eye contact, the other person might think you are hiding something or that you are insincere. Give a solid handshake.[51][full citation needed][page needed]

Reading non-verbal communication Being able to read the non-verbal communication of another person can significantly aid in the communication process. By being aware of inconsistencies between a person's verbal and non-verbal communication and reconciling them, negotiators can to come to better resolutions. Examples of incongruity in body language include:

    Nervous Laugh: A laugh not matching the situation. This could be a sign of nervousness or discomfort. When this happens, it may be good to probe with questions to discover the person's true feelings.
    Positive words but negative body language: If someone asks their negotiation partner if they are annoyed and the person pounds their fist and responds sharply, "what makes you think anything is bothering me?"[52][page needed]
    Hands raised in a clenched position: The person raising his/her hands in this position reveals frustration even when he/she is smiling. This is a signal that the person doing it may be holding back a negative attitude.[53][page needed]
    If possible, it may be helpful for negotiation partners to spend time together in a comfortable setting outside of the negotiation room. Knowing how each partner non-verbally communicates outside of the negotiation setting helps negotiation partners sense incongruity between verbal and non-verbal communication.

Conveying receptivity The way negotiation partners position their bodies relative to each other may influence how receptive each is to the other person's message and ideas.

    Face and eyes: Receptive negotiators smile, make plenty of eye contact. This conveys the idea that there is more interest in the person than in what is being said. On the other hand, non-receptive negotiators make little to no eye contact. Their eyes may be squinted, jaw muscles clenched and head turned slightly away from the speaker
    Arms and hands: To show receptivity, negotiators should spread arms and open hands on table or relaxed on their lap. Negotiators show poor receptivity when their hands are clenched, crossed, positioned in front of their mouth, or rubbing the back of their neck.
    Legs and Feet: Receptive negotiators sit with legs together or one leg slightly in front of the other. When standing, they distribute weight evenly and place hands on their hips with their body tilted toward the speaker. Non-receptive negotiators stand with legs crossed, pointing away from the speaker.
    Torso: Receptive negotiators sit on the edge of their chair, unbutton their suit coat with their body tilted toward the speaker. Non-receptive negotiators may lean back in their chair and keep their suit coat buttoned.

Receptive negotiators tend to appear relaxed with their hands open and palms visibly displayed.[54][page needed]
Barriers

    Die-hard bargainers
    Lack of trust
    Informational vacuums and negotiator's dilemma
    Structural impediments
    Spoilers
    Cultural and gender differences
    Communication problems
    The power of dialogue[55][page needed]

Emotion

Emotions play an important part in the negotiation process, although it is only in recent years that their effect is being studied. Emotions have the potential to play either a positive or negative role in negotiation. During negotiations, the decision as to whether or not to settle rests in part on emotional factors. Negative emotions can cause intense and even irrational behavior, and can cause conflicts to escalate and negotiations to break down, but may be instrumental in attaining concessions. On the other hand, positive emotions often facilitate reaching an agreement and help to maximize joint gains, but can also be instrumental in attaining concessions. Positive and negative discrete emotions can be strategically displayed to influence task and relational outcomes[56] and may play out differently across cultural boundaries.[57]
Affect effect

Dispositions for affects affect various stages of negotiation: which strategies to use, which strategies are actually chosen,[58] the way the other party and their intentions are perceived,[59] their willingness to reach an agreement and the final negotiated outcomes.[60] Positive affectivity (PA) and negative affectivity (NA) of one or more of the negotiating sides can lead to very different outcomes.
Positive affect

Even before the negotiation process starts, people in a positive mood have more confidence,[61] and higher tendencies to plan to use a cooperative strategy.[58] During the negotiation, negotiators who are in a positive mood tend to enjoy the interaction more, show less contentious behavior, use less aggressive tactics[62] and more cooperative strategies.[58] This in turn increases the likelihood that parties will reach their instrumental goals, and enhance the ability to find integrative gains.[63] Indeed, compared with negotiators with negative or natural affectivity, negotiators with positive affectivity reached more agreements and tended to honor those agreements more.[58] Those favorable outcomes are due to better decision making processes, such as flexible thinking, creative problem solving, respect for others' perspectives, willingness to take risks and higher confidence.[64] Post-negotiation positive affect has beneficial consequences as well. It increases satisfaction with achieved outcome and influences one's desire for future interactions.[64] The PA aroused by reaching an agreement facilitates the dyadic relationship, which brings commitment that sets the stage for subsequent interactions.[64]
PA also has its drawbacks: it distorts perception of self performance, such that performance is judged to be relatively better than it actually is.[61] Thus, studies involving self reports on achieved outcomes might be biased.
Negative affect

Negative affect has detrimental effects on various stages in the negotiation process. Although various negative emotions affect negotiation outcomes, by far the most researched is anger. Angry negotiators plan to use more competitive strategies and to cooperate less, even before the negotiation starts.[58] These competitive strategies are related to reduced joint outcomes. During negotiations, anger disrupts the process by reducing the level of trust, clouding parties' judgment, narrowing parties' focus of attention and changing their central goal from reaching agreement to retaliating against the other side.[62] Angry negotiators pay less attention to opponent's interests and are less accurate in judging their interests, thus achieve lower joint gains.[65] Moreover, because anger makes negotiators more self-centered in their preferences, it increases the likelihood that they will reject profitable offers.[62] Opponents who get really angry (or cry, or otherwise lose control) are more likely to make errors: make sure they are in your favor.[29] Anger does not help achieve negotiation goals either: it reduces joint gains[58] and does not boost personal gains, as angry negotiators do not succeed.[65] Moreover, negative emotions lead to acceptance of settlements that are not in the positive utility function but rather have a negative utility.[66] However, expression of negative emotions during negotiation can sometimes be beneficial: legitimately expressed anger can be an effective way to show one's commitment, sincerity, and needs.[62] Moreover, although NA reduces gains in integrative tasks, it is a better strategy than PA in distributive tasks (such as zero-sum).[64] In his work on negative affect arousal and white noise, Seidner found support for the existence of a negative affect arousal mechanism through observations regarding the devaluation of speakers from other ethnic origins. Negotiation may be negatively affected, in turn, by submerged hostility toward an ethnic or gender group.[67]
Conditions for emotion affect

Research indicates that negotiator's emotions do not necessarily affect the negotiation process. Albarracın et al. (2003) suggested that there are two conditions for emotional affect, both related to the ability (presence of environmental or cognitive disturbances) and the motivation:

    Identification of the affect: requires high motivation, high ability or both.
    Determination that the affect is relevant and important for the judgment: requires that either the motivation, the ability or both are low.

According to this model, emotions affect negotiations only when one is high and the other is low. When both ability and motivation are low, the affect is identified, and when both are high the affect is identified but discounted as irrelevant to judgment.[68] A possible implication of this model is, for example, that the positive effects PA has on negotiations (as described above) is seen only when either motivation or ability are low.
Effect of partner's emotions

Most studies on emotion in negotiations focus on the effect of the negotiator's own emotions on the process. However, what the other party feels might be just as important, as group emotions are known to affect processes both at the group and the personal levels. When it comes to negotiations, trust in the other party is a necessary condition for its emotion to affect,[59] and visibility enhances the effect.[63] Emotions contribute to negotiation processes by signaling what one feels and thinks and can thus prevent the other party from engaging in destructive behaviors and to indicate what steps should be taken next: PA signals to keep in the same way, while NA points that mental or behavioral adjustments are needed.[64]
Partner's emotions can have two basic effects on negotiator's emotions and behavior: mimetic/ reciprocal or complementary.[60] For example, disappointment or sadness might lead to compassion and more cooperation.[64] In a study by Butt et al. (2005) that simulated real multi-phase negotiation, most people reacted to the partner's emotions in reciprocal, rather than complementary, manner. Specific emotions were found to have different effects on the opponent's feelings and strategies chosen:

    Anger caused the opponents to place lower demands and to concede more in a zero-sum negotiation, but also to evaluate the negotiation less favorably.[69] It provoked both dominating and yielding behaviors of the opponent.[60]
    Pride led to more integrative and compromise strategies by the partner.[60]
    Guilt or regret expressed by the negotiator led to better impression of him by the opponent, however it also led the opponent to place higher demands.[59] On the other hand, personal guilt was related to more satisfaction with what one achieved.[64]
    Worry or disappointment left bad impression on the opponent, but led to relatively lower demands by the opponent.[59]

Dealing with emotions

    Make emotions explicit and validate - Taking a more proactive approach in discussing one's emotions can allow for a negotiation to focus on the problem itself, rather than any unexpressed feelings. It is important to allow both parties to share any emotions he or she may have.
    Allow time to let off steam - It is possible that one party may feel angry or frustrated at some point during the negotiation. Rather than try to avoid discussing those feelings, allow the individual to talk it out. Sitting and listening, without providing too much feedback to the substance itself, can offer enough support for the person to feel better. Once the grievances are released, it may become easier to negotiate.
    Symbolic gestures - Consider that an apology, or any other simple act, may be one of the most effective and low cost means to reduce any negative emotions between parties.[16]

Problems with laboratory studies

Negotiation is a rather complex interaction. Capturing all its complexity is a very difficult task, let alone isolating and controlling only certain aspects of it. For this reason most negotiation studies are done under laboratory conditions, and focus only on some aspects. Although lab studies have their advantages, they do have major drawbacks when studying emotions:

    Emotions in lab studies are usually manipulated and are therefore relatively 'cold' (not intense). Although those 'cold' emotions might be enough to show effects, they are qualitatively different from the 'hot' emotions often experienced during negotiations.[70]
    In real life, people select which negotiations to enter, which affects emotional commitment, motivation and interests —but this is not the case in lab studies.[64]
    Lab studies tend to focus on relatively few well-defined emotions. Real-life scenarios provoke a much wider scale of emotions.[64]
    Coding the emotions has a double catch: if done by a third side, some emotions might not be detected as the negotiator sublimates them for strategic reasons. Self-report measures might overcome this, but they are usually filled only before or after the process, and if filled during the process might interfere with it.[64]

Group composition
Multi-party

While negotiations involving more than two parties is less often researched, some results from two-party negotiations still apply with more than two parties. One such result is that in negotiations it is common to see language similarity arise between the two negotiating parties. In three-party negotiations, language similarity still arose, and results were particularly efficient when the party with the most to gain from the negotiation adopted language similarities from the other parties.[71]
Team
Students from University of Tromsø and University of Toronto during 5th International Negotiation Tournament – Warsaw Negotiation Round in the Polish Senate (2014).

Due to globalization and growing business trends, negotiation in the form of teams is becoming widely adopted. Teams can effectively collaborate to break down a complex negotiation. There is more knowledge and wisdom dispersed in a team than in a single mind. Writing, listening, and talking, are specific roles team members must satisfy. The capacity base of a team reduces the amount of blunder, and increases familiarity in a negotiation.[72]

However, unless a team can appropriately utilize the full capacity of its potential, effectiveness can suffer. One factor in the effectiveness of team negotiation is a problem that occurs through solidarity behavior. Solidarity behavior occurs when one team member reduces his or her own utility (benefit) in order to increase the benefits of other team members. This behavior is likely to occur when interest conflicts rise. When the utility/needs of the negotiation opponent does not align with every team member's interests, team members begin to make concessions and balance the benefits gained among the team.[73]

Intuitively, this may feel like a cooperative approach. However, though a team may aim to negotiate in a cooperative or collaborative nature, the outcome may be less successful than is possible, especially when integration is possible. Integrative potential is possible when different negotiation issues are of different importance to each team member. Integrative potential is often missed due to the lack of awareness of each member's interests and preferences. Ultimately, this leads to a poorer negotiation result.

Thus, a team can perform more effectively if each member discloses his or her preferences prior to the negotiation. This step will allow the team to recognize and organize the team's joint priorities, which they can take into consideration when engaging with the opposing negotiation party. Because a team is more likely to discuss shared information and common interests, teams must make an active effort to foster and incorporate unique viewpoints from experts from different fields. Research by Daniel Thiemann, which largely focused on computer-supported collaborative tasks, found that the Preference Awareness method is an effective tool for fostering the knowledge about joint priorities and further helps the team judge which negotiation issues were of highest importance.[74]
Women

Many of the strategies in negotiation vary across genders, and this leads to variations in outcomes for different genders, often with women experiencing less success in negotiations as a consequence. This is due to a number of factors, including that it has been shown that it is more difficult for women to be self-advocating when they are negotiating. Many of the implications of these findings have strong financial impacts in addition to the social backlash faced by self-advocating women in negotiations, as compared to other advocating women, self-advocating men, and other advocating men. Research in this area has been studied across platforms, in addition to more specific areas like women as physician assistants.[75] The backlash associated with this type of behavior is attributed to the fact that to be self-advocated is considered masculine, whereas the alternative, being accommodating, is considered more feminine.[76] Males, however, do not appear to face any type of backlash for not being self-advocating.[77]

This research has been supported by multiple studies, including one which evaluated candidates participating in a negotiation regarding compensation. This study showed that women who initiated negotiations were evaluated more poorly than men who initiated negotiations. In another variation of this particular setup, men and women evaluated videos of men and women either accepting a compensation package or initiating negotiations. Men evaluated women more poorly for initiating negotiations, while women evaluated both men and women more poorly for initiating negotiations. In this particular experiment, women were less likely to initiate a negotiation with a male, citing nervousness, but there was no variation with the negotiation was initiated with another female.[78]

Research also supports the notion that the way individuals respond in a negotiation varies depending on the gender of the opposite party. In all-male groups, the use of deception showed no variation upon the level of trust between negotiating parties, however in mixed-sex groups there was an increase in deceptive tactics when it was perceived that the opposite party was using an accommodating strategy. In all-female groups, there were many shifts in when individuals did and did not employ deception in their negotiation tactics.[76]
Academic negotiation

The academic world contains a unique management system, wherein faculty members, some of which have tenure, reside in academic units (e.g. departments) and are overseen by chairs, or heads. These chairs/heads are in turn supervised by deans of the college where their academic unit resides. Negotiation is an area where faculty, chairs/heads and their deans have little preparation; their doctoral degrees are typically in a highly specialized area according to their academic expertise. However, the academic environment frequently presents with situations where negotiation takes place. For example, many faculty are hired with an expectation that they will conduct research and publish scholarly works. For these faculty, where their research requires equipment, space, and/or funding, negotiation of a "start-up" package is critical for their success and future promotion.[79][80] Also, department chairs often find themselves in situations, typically involving resource redistribution where they must negotiate with their dean, on behalf of their unit. And deans oversee colleges where they must optimize limited resources, such as research space or operating funds while at the same time creating an environment that fosters student success, research accomplishments and more.[79][80][81]

Integrative negotiation is the type predominately found in academic negotiation – where trust and long-term relationships between personnel are valued. Techniques found to be particularly useful in academic settings include:[79][80] (1) doing your homework – grounding your request in facts; (2) knowing your value; (3) listening actively and acknowledging what is being said,[82] (4) putting yourself in their shoes, (5) asking – negotiation begins with an ask, (6) not committing immediately, (7) managing emotion and (8) keeping in mind the principle of a "wise agreement",[82] with its associated emphasis on meeting the interests of both parties to the extent possible as a key working point. The articles by Callahan, et al.[79] and Amekudzi-Kennedy, et al.[80] contain several case studies of academic negotiations.
Etymology

The word "negotiation" originated in the early 15th century from the Old French negociacion from Latin negotiatio from neg- "no" and otium "leisure".[83] These terms mean "business, trade, traffic". By the late 1570s negotiation had the definition, "to communicate in search of mutual agreement." With this new introduction and this meaning, it showed a shift in "doing business" to "bargaining about" business.[83]
See also

    Alternative dispute resolution
    Alternating offers protocol
    Collaborative software
    Collective action
    Conciliation
    Conflict resolution research
    Consistency (negotiation)
    Contract
    Cross-cultural
    Cross-cultural differences in decision-making
    Diplomacy
    Dispute resolution
    Expert determination
    Flipism
    Game theory
    Impasse
    International relations
    Leadership
    Multilateralism
    Nash equilibrium
    Principled negotiation
    Prisoner's dilemma
    Program on Negotiation
    Delaying tactic

References

Adnan, Muhamad Hariz Muhamad; Hassan, Mohd Fadzil; Aziz, Izzatdin; Paputungan, Irving V (August 2016). "Protocols for agent-based autonomous negotiations: A review". 2016 3rd International Conference on Computer and Information Sciences (ICCOINS). Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: IEEE: 622–626. doi:10.1109/ICCOINS.2016.7783287. ISBN 978-1-5090-2549-7.
de Felice, Fortune Barthélémy (1976). "The 50%Solution". In Zartman, I William (ed.). Negotiation, or the art of Negotiating. United States: Doubleday Anchor. p. 549.
Fisher, Roger; Ury, William (1984). Patton, Bruce (ed.). Getting to yes : negotiating agreement without giving in (Reprint ed.). New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0140065343.
Adnan, Muhamad Hariz; Hassan, Mohd Fadzil; Aziz, Izzatdin Abdul; Rashid, Nuraini Abdul (2019), Saeed, Faisal; Gazem, Nadhmi; Mohammed, Fathey; Busalim, Abdelsalam (eds.), "A Survey and Future Vision of Double Auctions-Based Autonomous Cloud Service Negotiations", Recent Trends in Data Science and Soft Computing, Springer International Publishing, 843, pp. 488–498, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-99007-1_46, ISBN 978-3-319-99006-4
Adnan, Muhamad Hariz; Hassan, Mohd Fadzil; Aziz, Izzatdin Abd (October 2018). "Business Level Objectives of Customer for Autonomous Cloud Service Negotiation". Advanced Science Letters. 24 (10): 7524–7528. doi:10.1166/asl.2018.12971.
Hargreaves, Brendan; Hult, Henrik; Reda, Sherief (January 2008). "Within-die process variations: How accurately can they be statistically modeled?". 2008 Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference. IEEE: 524–530. doi:10.1109/aspdac.2008.4484007. ISBN 978-1-4244-1921-0.
Chris Honeyman & Andrea Kupfer Schneider, eds., The Negotiator's Handbook (Dispute Resolution Institute Press, 2017; Victor Kremenyuk, ed., International Negotiation. JosseyBass, 2nd ed. 2002)
Richard Walton & Robert McKersie, A Behavioral Theory of Labor Negotiations [McGraw-Hill 1965]; Leigh Thompson, The Mind and Heart of the Negotiator [Prentice-Hall 2001]; I William Zartman & Victor Kremenyuk, eds., Peace vs Justice: Negotiating Forward- vs Backward-Looking Outcomes. Rowman & Littlefield, 2005]
Shell, G Richard (1999). Bargaining for Advantage. United States: Penguin. ISBN 9780670881338.
Saner, Raymond. The Expert Negotiator, The Netherlands: Kluwer Law International, 2000 (p. 40)
McDermott, Rose (2009). "Negotiated Risks". In Avenhaus, Rudolf[; Sjösted, Gunnar (eds.). Prospect Theory and Negotiation. Germany: Springer. p. 372. ISBN 978-3-540-92992-5.
John Nash, "The Bargaining problem," Econometrica XVIII 1:155-162, 1950; G C Homans, Social Behavior. Harcourt, Brace and world, 1961
Follett, Mary (1951). Creative Experience. United States: P Smith.
Trotschel; Hufmeier; Loschelder; Schwartz; Collwitzer (2011). "Perspective taking as a means to overcome motivational barriers in negotiations: When putting oneself in the opponents shoes helps to walk towards agreements" (PDF). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 101 (4): 771–790. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.728.9853. doi:10.1037/a0023801. PMID 21728447.
Gregory Brazeal, "Against Gridlock: The Viability of Interest-Based Legislative Negotiation", Harvard Law & Policy Review (Online), vol. 3, p. 1 (2009).
Fisher, Roger, Ury, Wiliam, & Paten, Bruce (1991). Getting to yes: Negotiating agreement without giving in. Penguin: New York. Chapter 2
Johnston, Peter D (2008). Negotiating with Giants. United States: Negotiation Press. pp. Pages 4 to 5. ISBN 978-0980942101.
Chernow, Ron (2004). Titan, The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr. United States: Penguin Random House. pp. Pages 111 to 112. ISBN 978-1400077304.
"Athletes' performance declines following contract years". ScienceDaily. 22 January 2014.
Johnston, Peter D. (2008). Negotiating with Giants. United States: Negotiation Press. pp. Page 4. ISBN 978-0980942101.
Johnston, Peter D. (2008). Negotiating with Giants. United States: Negotiation Press. pp. Page 168. ISBN 978-0980942101.
"negotiating in bad faith", example of use of "bad faith" definition in Oxford Online Dictionary
IBHS Union Voice (3 December 2008). ""Bad Faith Negotiation", Union Voice". Unitas.wordpress.com. Retrieved 24 August 2014.
example of use - "the Republicans accused the Democrats of "negotiating in bad faith", Oxford Online Dictionary
Douglas Stuart and Harvey Starr, "The 'Inherent Bad Faith Model' Reconsidered: Dulles, Kennedy, and Kissinger", Political Psychology(subscription required)
"... the most widely studied is the inherent bad faith model of one's opponent ...", The handbook of social psychology, Volumes 1-2, edited by Daniel T. Gilbert, Susan T. Fiske, Gardner Lindzey
Jung/Krebs, The Essentials of Contract Negotiation, p. 125 (keyword: Negotiation Pie).
Jung/Krebs, The Essentials of Contract Negotiation, p. 126 (keyword: Negotiation Pie).
Churchman, David. 1993. Negotiation Tactics. Maryland: University Press of America. p. 13.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83 (5) (2002), pp. 1131–1140
Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement
Negotiation, Readings, Exercises and Cases, Roy J. Lewicki[full citation needed]
Thomas, Kenneth W (21 November 2006). "Conflict and conflict management: Reflections and update" (PDF). Journal of Organizational Behavior. 13 (3): 265–274. doi:10.1002/job.4030130307. hdl:10945/40295.
Shell, R. G. (2006). Bargaining for advantage. New York: Penguin Books.
Marks, M; Harold, C (2011). "Who Asks and Who Receives in Salary Negotiation". Journal of Organizational Behavior. 32 (3): 371–394. doi:10.1002/job.671.
Sorenson, R; Morse, E; Savage, G (1999). "The Test of the Motivations Underlying Choice of Conflict Strategies in the Dual-Concern Model". The International Journal of Conflict Management. 10: 25–44. doi:10.1108/eb022817.
Forsyth, David (2009). Group dynamics. Wadsworth Pub Co. pp. 379–409.
Gates, Steve (2011). The Negotiation Book. United Kingdom: A John Wiley and Sons, LTD., Publication. p. 232. ISBN 978-0-470-66491-9.
Gates, Steve (2011). The Negotiation Book. United Kingdom: A John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Publication. p. 240. ISBN 978-0-470-66491-9.
Goldman, Alvin (1991). Settling For More: Mastering Negotiating Strategies and Techniques. Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-87179-651-6.
Lewicki, R. J.; D. M. Saunders; J. W. Minton (2001). Essentials of Negotiation. New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-07-231285-0.
Jung/Krebs, p. 73.
Gates, Steve (2011). The Negotiation Book. United Kingdom: A John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Publication. p. 246. ISBN 978-0-470-66491-9.
Coburn, Calum. "Neutralising Manipulative Negotiation Tactics". Negotiation Training Solutions. Retrieved 1 October 2012.
Gates, Steve (2011). The Negotiation Book. United Kingdom: A John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Publication. p. 245. ISBN 978-0-470-66491-9.
Jung/Krebs, p. 102.
Lewicki, R. J.; D.M. Saunders; J.W. Minton (2001). Essentials of Negotiation. New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-07-231285-0.
Lewicki, R. J.; D. M. Saunders; J. W. Minton (2001). Essentials of Negotiation. New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education. p. 86. ISBN 978-0-07-231285-0.
Vecchi, G. M.; Van Hasselt, V. B.; Romano, S. J. (2005). "Crisis (hostage) negotiation: Current strategies and issues in high-risk conflict resolution". Aggression and Violent Behavior. 10 (5): 533–551. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2004.10.001.
Hui, Zhou; Tingqin Zhang. "Body Language in Business Negotiation". International Journal of Business and Management. 3 (2).
Body Language Magic.
Donaldson, Michael C. (18 April 2011). Negotiating For Dummies. Indianapolis, Indiana: Wiley Publishing, Inc. ISBN 978-1-118-06808-3.
Pease, Barbara and Alan (2006). The Definitive Book of Body Language. New York: Bantam Dell. ISBN 978-0-553-80472-0.
Donaldson, Michael C.; Donaldson, Mimi (1996). Negotiating for dummies. New York: Hungry Minds. ISBN 978-1-56884-867-9.
Luecke, Richard (2003). Negotiation. Harvard Business Essentials. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. ISBN 9781591391111.
Kopelman, S.; Rosette, A.; and Thompson, L. (2006). "The three faces of eve: Strategic displays of positive neutral and negative emotions in negotiations". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (OBHDP), 99 (1), 81-101.
Kopelman, S. and Rosette, A. S. (2008). "Cultural variation in response to strategic display of emotions in negotiations". Special Issue on Emotion and Negotiation in Group Decision and Negotiation (GDN), 17 (1) 65-77.
Forgas, J. P. (1998). "On feeling good and getting your way: Mood effects on negotiator cognition and behavior". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 74 (3): 565–577. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.565. PMID 11407408.
Van Kleef, G.A.; De Dreu, C.K.W.; Manstead, A.S.R. (2006). "Supplication and Appeasement in Conflict and Negotiation: The Interpersonal Effects of Disappointment, Worry, Guilt, and Regret" (PDF). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 91 (1): 124–142. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.91.1.124. PMID 16834484.
Butt, AN; Choi, JN; Jaeger, A (2005). "The effects of self-emotion, counterpart emotion, and counterpart behavior on negotiator behavior: a comparison of individual-level and dyad-level dynamics". Journal of Organizational Behavior. 26 (6): 681–704. doi:10.1002/job.328.
Kramer, R. M.; Newton, E.; Pommerenke, P. L. (1993). "Self-enhancement biases and negotiator judgment: Effects of self-esteem and mood". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 56: 110–133. doi:10.1006/obhd.1993.1047.
Maiese, Michelle "Emotions" Beyond Intractability. Eds. Guy Burgess and Heidi Burgess. Conflict Research Consortium, University of Colorado, Boulder. Posted: July 2005 downloaded: 30 August 2007
Carnevale, P. J. D.; Isen, A. M. (1986). "The influence of positive affect and visual access on the discovery of integrative solutions in bilateral negotiation" (PDF). Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 37: 1–13. doi:10.1016/0749-5978(86)90041-5. hdl:2027.42/26263.
Barry, B.; Fulmer, I. S.; & Van Kleef, G. A. (2004) "I laughed, I cried, I settled: The role of emotion in negotiation". In M. J. Gelfand & J. M. Brett (Eds.), The handbook of negotiation and culture (pp. 71–94). Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Allred, K. G.; Mallozzi, J. S.; Matsui, F.; Raia, C. P. (1997). "The influence of anger and compassion on negotiation performance". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 70 (3): 175–187. doi:10.1006/obhd.1997.2705.
Davidson, M. N.; Greenhalgh, L. (1999). "The role of emotion in negotiation: The impact of anger and race". Research on Negotiation in Organizations. 7: 3–26.
Seidner, Stanley S. (1991). Negative Affect Arousal Reactions from Mexican and Puerto Rican Respondents. Washington, D.C.: ERIC.
Albarracin, D.; Kumkale, G.T. (2003). "Affect as Information in Persuasion: A Model of Affect Identification and Discounting". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 84 (3): 453–469. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.3.453. PMC 4797933. PMID 12635909.
Van Kleef, G. A.; De Dreu, C. K. W.; Manstead, A. S. R. (2004). "The interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in negotiations" (PDF). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 86 (1): 57–76. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.86.1.57. PMID 14717628. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2007.
Bazerman, M. H.; Curhan, J. R.; Moore, D. A.; Valley, K. L. (2000). "Negotiation". Annual Review of Psychology. 51: 279–314. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.51.1.279. PMID 10751973.
Sagi, Eyal; Diermeier, Daniel (1 December 2015). "Language Use and Coalition Formation in Multiparty Negotiations". Cognitive Science. 41 (1): 259–271. doi:10.1111/cogs.12325. ISSN 1551-6709. PMID 26671166.
Sparks, D. B. (1993). The Dynamics of Effective Negotiation (second edition). Houston: Gulf Publishing Co.
Wang, J., & Gong, J. (n.d.). Team Negotiation Based on Solidarity Behavior: A Concession Strategy in the Team. Retrieved 14 November 2016, from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=7515883
Thiemann, D., & Hesse, F. W. (2015). Learning about Team Members' Preferences: Computer-Supported Preference Awareness in the Negotiation Preparation of Teams.
Brianne, Hall; Tracy, Hoelting (24 April 2015). Influence of negotiation and practice setting on salary disparities between male and female physician assistants.
Gladstone, Eric; O'Connor, Kathleen M. (1 September 2014). "A counterpart's feminine face signals cooperativeness and encourages negotiators to compete". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 125 (1): 18–25. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2014.05.001.
Amanatullah, Emily T.; Tinsley, Catherine H. (1 January 2013). "Punishing female negotiators for asserting too much…or not enough: Exploring why advocacy moderates backlash against assertive female negotiators". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 120 (1): 110–122. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2012.03.006.
Bowles, Hannah; Babcock, Linda; Lai, Lei (2006). "Social incentives for gender diVerences in the propensity to initiate negotiations: Sometimes it does hurt to ask" (PDF). Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 103: 84–103. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2006.09.001.
Callahan, J; Besterfield-Sacre, M.E.; Carpenter, J.P.; Needy, K.L.; Schrader, C.B. (2016). "Listening and Negotiation". 2016 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, New Orleans, Louisiana. doi:10.18260/p.25571.
Amekudzi-Kennedy, A.A.; Hall, K.D.; Harding, T.S.; Moll, A.J.; Callahan, J. (2017). "Listening and Negotiation II". 2017 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, Columbus, Ohio. doi:10.18260/1-2--28631.
McKersie, R.B. (2012). "The Day-to-Day Life of a Dean: Engaging in Negotiations and negotiations". Negotiation Journal 475-488. 28 (4): 475–488. doi:10.1111/j.1571-9979.2012.00352.x.
Fisher, R.; Ury, W.; Patton, B. (2012). Getting to yes: Negotiating agreement without giving in. Penguin: New York.

    "negotiation | Origin and meaning of negotiation by Online Etymology Dictionary". www.etymonline.com. Retrieved 19 August 2019.

Further reading
See also: List of books about negotiation

    Camp, Jim. (2007). No, The Only Negotiating System You Need For Work Or Home. Crown Business. New York.
    Movius, H. and Susskind, L. E. (2009) Built to Win: Creating a World Class Negotiating Organization. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press.
    Roger Dawson, Secrets of Power Negotiating - Inside Secrets from a Master Negotiator. Career Press, 1999.
    Davérède, Alberto L. "Negotiations, Secret", Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law
    Ronald M. Shapiro and Mark A. Jankowski, The Power of Nice: How to Negotiate So Everyone Wins - Especially You!, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998, ISBN 0-471-08072-1
    Marshall Rosenberg (2015). Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life, 3rd Edition: Life-Changing Tools for Healthy Relationships. PD Press. ISBN 978-1-892005-54-0.
    Roger Fisher and Daniel Shapiro, Beyond Reason: Using Emotions as You Negotiate, Viking/Penguin, 2005.
    Douglas Stone, Bruce Patton, and Sheila Heen, foreword by Roger Fisher, Difficult Conversations: How to Discuss What Matters Most, Penguin, 1999, ISBN 0-14-028852-X
    Catherine Morris, ed. Negotiation in Conflict Transformation and Peacebuilding: A Selected Bibliography. Victoria, Canada: Peacemakers Trust.
    Howard Raiffa, The Art and Science of Negotiation, Belknap Press 1982, ISBN 0-674-04812-1
    David Churchman, "Negotiation Tactics" University Press of America, Inc. 1993 ISBN 0-8191-9164-7
    William Ury, Getting Past No: Negotiating Your Way from Confrontation to Cooperation, revised second edition, Bantam, 1993, trade paperback, ISBN 0-553-37131-2; 1st edition under the title, Getting Past No: Negotiating with Difficult People, Bantam, 1991, hardcover, 161 pages, ISBN 0-553-07274-9
    William Ury, Roger Fisher and Bruce Patton, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving in, Revised 2nd edition, Penguin USA, 1991, trade paperback, ISBN 0-14-015735-2; Houghton Mifflin, 1992, hardcover, 200 pages, ISBN 0-395-63124-6. The first edition, unrevised, Houghton Mifflin, 1981, hardcover, ISBN 0-395-31757-6
    The political philosopher Charles Blattberg distinguished between negotiation and conversation, and criticized conflict-resolution methods that give too much weight to the former. See his From Pluralist to Patriotic Politics: Putting Practice First, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-19-829688-6, a work of political philosophy; and his Shall We Dance? A Patriotic Politics for Canada, Montreal and Kingston: McGill Queen's University Press, 2003, ISBN 0-7735-2596-3, which applies that philosophy to the Canadian case.
    Leigh L. Thompson, The Mind and Heart of the Negotiator 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall 0ct.2005.
    Nicolas Iynedjian, Négociation - Guide pratique, CEDIDAC 62, Lausanne 2005, ISBN 2-88197-061-3
    Michele J. Gelfand and Jeanne M. Brett, ed. Handbook of negotiation and culture, 2004. ISBN 0-8047-4586-2
    "Emotion and conflict" from the Beyond Intractability Database
    *Echavarria, Martin (2015). Enabling Collaboration – Achieving Success Through Strategic Alliances and Partnerships. LID Publishing Inc. ISBN 9780986079337.Nierenberg, Gerard I. (1995). The Art of Negotiating: Psychological Strategies for Gaining Advantageous Bargains. Barnes and Noble. ISBN 978-1-56619-816-5.
    Andrea Schneider & Christopher Honeyman, eds., The Negotiator's Fieldbook, American Bar Association (2006). ISBN 1-59031-545-6 [1]
    Dr. Chester Karrass "Effective Negotiating Tips"
    Kenneth Cloke, Joan Goldsmith. The End of Management and the Rise of Organizational Democracy. ISBN 9780787959128. Wiley, 2002.
    Richard H. Solomon and Nigel Quinney. American Negotiating Behavior: Wheeler-Dealers, Legal Eagles, Bullies, and Preachers (United States Institute of Peace Press, 2010); 357 pages; identifies four mindsets in the negotiation behavior of policy makers and diplomats; draws on interviews with more than 50 practitioners
    Charles Arthur Willard. Liberalism and the Problem of Knowledge: A New Rhetoric for Modern Democracy. University of Chicago Press. 1996.
    John McMillan "Games, Strategies, and Managers" Oxford University Press. 1992. ISBN 0-19-507403-3. [2]
    Charles Arthur Willard. A Theory of Argumentation. University of Alabama Press. 1989.
    Charles Arthur Willard. Argumentation and the Social Grounds of Knowledge. University of Alabama Press. 1982.
    Short definition of negotiation
    "Negotiation Etymology". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 11 May 2014.
    Trotschel; Hufmeier; Loschelder; Schwartz; Collwitzer (2011). "Perspective taking as a means to overcome motivational barriers in negotiations: When putting oneself in the opponents shoes helps to walk towards agreements" (PDF). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 101 (4): 771–790. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.728.9853. doi:10.1037/a0023801. PMID 21728447.
    Hames, David S. (2011). "Integrative Negotiation: A strategy for creating value". Negotiation: Closing deals, settling disputes, and making team decisions. SAGE Publications. ISBN 9781483332727.
    Marks, M; Harold, C (2011). "Who Asks and Who Receives in Salary Negotiation". Journal of Organizational Behavior. 32 (3): 371–394. doi:10.1002/job.671.
    Sorenson, R; Morse, E; Savage, G (1999). "The Test of the Motivations Underlying Choice of Conflict Strategies in the Dual-Concern Model". The International Journal of Conflict Management. 10: 25–44. doi:10.1108/eb022817.

Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	

    GND: 4062875-9 LCCN: sh85090650 NARA: 10642225 NDL: 00566758

Categories:

    NegotiationDispute resolutionPersonal selling

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikiquote

Print/export

    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    العربية
    Azərbaycanca
    Català
    Čeština
    Dansk
    Deutsch
    Eesti
    Español
    Esperanto
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Français
    Frysk
    ગુજરાતી
    한국어
    हिन्दी
    Hrvatski
    Ido
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Italiano
    עברית
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    Македонски
    Nederlands
    日本語
    Norsk bokmål
    Polski
    Português
    Română
    Русский
    Simple English
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    کوردی
    Српски / srpski
    Suomi
    Svenska
    தமிழ்
    తెలుగు
    ไทย
    Türkçe
    Українська
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 19 May 2020, at 00:53 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki


The reason past and future tense is used more commonly than present tense when speaking is because usually you are telling someone what you have done or what you plan on doing. Speaking in the present tense is used primarily to tell someone what you are currently doing.

As in previous lessons in 'Bored and Greeting' it is very common to have a conversation using the present tense when you run into somebody or when you make or receive a phone call.

Let's use this time now to incorporate what we have learned so far.

Person A: "Hi Jack. What are you doing?"
Person B: "Hi Mary. I'm filling out a job application."
Person A: "Are you finished with school already?"
Person B: "No. I have one more semester, but it would be great to have a job lined up."

Person A: "How is your day going?"
Person B: "Quite busy. I'm preparing for my presentation tomorrow on our marketing strategy. I'm not even half done yet."
Person A: "You must feel stressed out now."
Person B: "That's an understatement."

Person A: "What are you doing now?"
Person B: "I'm playing pool with my friends at a pool hall."
Person A: "I didn't know you play pool. Are you having fun?"
Person B: "I'm having a great time. How about you? What are you doing?"
Person A: "I'm taking a break from my homework. There seems to be no end to the amount of work I have to do."
Person B: "I'm glad I'm not in your shoes."

previous lesson	next lesson


Do you need to Learn English Faster?
Do you want to speak English fluently?

The best way to learn English is now FREE!!! > > > The SKESL System < < <


	
Copyright © 2005 - 2019 TALKENGLISH.COM
TERMS OF USE   |   CONTACT   |   PRIVACY POLICY   |   FAQs

ata/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Was Volta an Italian physicist?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is Volta buried in the city of Pittsburgh?	no	easy	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is Volta buried in the city of Pittsburgh?	no	easy	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Did Volta have a passion for the study of electricity?	yes	easy	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Did Volta have a passion for the study of electricity?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What is the battery made by Volta credited to be?	the first cell	medium	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What is the battery made by Volta credited to be?	the first cell	medium	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What important electrical unit was named in honor of Volta?	the volt	medium	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What important electrical unit was named in honor of Volta?	volt	medium	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Where did Volta enter retirement?	Spain	medium	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Where did Volta enter retirement?	Spain	medium	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is it a disadvantage for something to be unsafe to handle?	yes	hard	too hard	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is it a disadvantage for something to be unsafe to handle?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Was Lombardy under Napoleon's rule in 1800?	yes	hard	hard	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Was Lombardy under Napoleon's rule in 1800?	yes	hard	hard	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Was the Italian 10.000 lira banknote created before the euro?	yes	hard	hard	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Was the Italian 10.000 lira banknote created before the euro?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	For how many years did Alessandro Volta live?	53	NULL	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Did Alessandro Volta live to be 80 years old?	no	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What was Alessandro Volta`s profession?	physisist	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	How old was Alessandro Volta when he died?	 82	NULL	hard	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	How many years ago was it when Volta married the daughter of Count Ludovico Peregrini , Teresa , with whom he raised three sons?	215	NULL	hard	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is the electrolyte sulphuric acid?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is volta buried in the city  of Como?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Was his 1800  paper written in French?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Before 1796, was Lombardy ruled by Austria?	yes	NULL	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Did he receive the Society`s 1794 Copley Medal?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Did he experiment with individual cells?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	When did lombardy come under Napoleon`s rule?	From 1796 to 1815	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Where did he publish his invention of the Voltaic pile battery?	the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society	NULL	medium	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Did he become professor of experimental physics at the University of Pavia?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is it true that his passion been always the study of electricity?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	His passion been always the study of what?	Electricity	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is it true that Volta married the daughter of Count Ludovico Peregrini?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is it true that he published his invention of the Voltaic pile battery?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a10
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Amedeo Avogadro Italian?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Amedeo Avogadro Italian?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did Amedeo Avogadro graduate?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did Amedeo Avogadro graduate?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did Avogadro live in England?	No	easy	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Where was Avogadro a professor of physics?	University of Turin	medium	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Where was Avogadro a professor of physics?	University of Turin	medium	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	How many children did Avogadro have?	six	medium	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	How many children did Avogadro have?	six	medium	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What is Avogadro most noted for?	contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight	medium	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What is Avogadro most noted for?	contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight	medium	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What is Avogadro's number?	6.02214199x10 23	hard	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What is Avogadro's number?	6.02214199x10 23	hard	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	In what year did Avogadro stop teaching at Turin University?	1853	hard	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	In what year did Avogadro stop teaching at Turin University?	1823	hard	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What subject did Avogadro study first?	ecclesiastical law	hard	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What subject did Avogadro study first?	ecclesiastical law	hard	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What was Amedeo Avogadro`s birthplace?	Turin	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What was Amedeo Avogadro`s profession?	professor of physics	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	How many years ago was it when he became a professor of physics at the University of Turin?	189	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What is Amedeo Avogadro`s first name?	Amedeo	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What is Amedeo Avogadro`s last name?	Avogadro	NULL	too easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Amedeo Avogadro born in North America?	no	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was King Victor  Emmanuel  III there to pay  homage  to Avogadro?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	In fact, was Avogadro `s  famous  1811  paper written in French . )	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is avogadro `s  number commonly used to compute  the results  of chemical reactions?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Hence, can relative molecular  masses be calculated from the masses  of gas samples?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did he publish his work?	Yes	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did Avogadro submit his poem?	Yes.	NULL	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is it true that loschmidt calculated first the value of Avogadro number?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Loschmidt calculated first the value of what?	Avogadro's number	NULL	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Hence , can relative molecular masses be calculated from the masses of gas samples ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Can the title of this famous 1811 paper be roughly translated into English as "essay on determining the Relative Masses of the Elementary Molecules of Bodies" ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What is Amedeo Avogadro?	A person.	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Where is Amedeo Avogadro from?	Italy.	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Anders_Celsius	When did Anders Celcius publish his observations on the aurora borealis?	1733	easy	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	When did Anders Celcius publish his observations on the aurora borealis?	1733 	easy	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What did Anders Celsius determine about the boiling of water?	He determined the dependence of the boiling of water with atmospheric pressure.	easy	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What did Anders Celsius determine about the boiling of water?	dependence with atmospheric pressure	easy	hard	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Which temperature scale did Celsius propose?	Celcius	easy	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Which temperature scale did Celsius propose?	 the Celsius temperature scale 	easy	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What is the boiling point of water dependent on?	atmospheric pressure	medium	hard	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What is the boiling point of water dependent on?	atmospheric pressure	medium	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Where was Celsius born?	Uppsala in Sweden	medium	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Where was Celsius born?	Uppsala, Sweden	medium	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Whad did Celsius report in his paper "Observations of two persistent degrees on a thermometer"?	the freezing point is independent of latitude	medium	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	How old was Celsius when he died?	42	hard	hard	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	How old was Celsius when he died?	42	hard	hard	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What is temperature would water have to be to be halfway between its standard boiling and freezing point?	50	hard	hard	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What is the difference between Celsius' original temperature scale and the one we use today?	The scale was reversed by Carolus Linnaeus. 	hard	hard	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What is the difference between Celsius' original temperature scale and the one we use today?	scale was reversed 	hard	hard	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What was Anders Celsius`s profession?	professor of astronomy	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	How old was Anders Celsius when he died?	42	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What is Anders Celsius`s last name?	Celsius	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Was celsius born in Uppsala  in Sweden?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Is The Celsius  crater  on the Moon named after him?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Was Anders Celsius  ( November 27 ,  1701  April 25 ,  1744  ) a Swedish  astronomer?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Was Anders Celsius the first  to perform  and  publish  careful experiments  aiming at the definition  of an international  temperature  scale  on scientific grounds?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Was he professor at Uppsala University?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Is it true that he published a collection of 316 observations?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	He published a collection of what?	observations	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
Arabic_language	Pronouns in which location are marked for person , number and gender?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Can syllables begin with a vowel?	no	NULL	easy	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Are calligraphers held in great esteem?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Have many European languages borrowed numerous words from it?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Are the most active in Damascus and Cairo?	(bad question)	NULL		data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Do arabs consider literary Arabic?	(bad question)	NULL		data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Was Arabic vehicle in science?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Is it true that the sociolinguistic situation of Arabic provides a prime example of the linguistic phenomenon?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	The sociolinguistic situation of Arabic provides a prime example of what?	the linguistic phenomenon of diglossia	NULL	medium	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Is arabic source of vocabulary?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Is arabic language of the Qur an?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Is it true that most speak Arabic as their native language?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	Are pronouns in Literary Arabic marked for person , number and gender ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a3
Arabic_language	However , are non-human plural nouns grammatically considered to be feminine singular ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a3
Bee	Is a bee an insect?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
Bee	Are bees related to ants?	yes	easy	hard	data/set1/a8
Bee	Have managed populations of European honey bees experienced substantial declines?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
Bee	Where do bees live?	in colonies	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
Bee	When do bumblebee colonies reach peak population?	mid to late summer	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
Bee	What do people commonly call cleptoparasitic bees?	cuckoo bees	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
Bee	How did vespoid wasps evolve?	from predatory ancestors	hard	medium	data/set1/a8
Bee	What do humans use bees for?	honey	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
Bee	Why do honey bee queens continue to lay eggs during the foraging season?	to replace daily casualties	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
Beijing	Does Beijing mean "northern capital"?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Beijing	Are the caves of Dragon Bone Hill near the village of Zhoukoudian in Fangshan District?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Beijing	Are hutongs disappearing?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Beijing	When did Beijing host the Olympic Games?	2008	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Beijing	When was the An Shi Rebellion launched?	in 755 AD	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Beijing	In 1949, where did Communist forces enter without a fight?	Beiping	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Beijing	When did Yuan Shikai die?	1916	hard	too hard	data/set3/a7
Beijing	Where does air pollution in Beijing come from?	surrounding cities and provinces	hard	medium	data/set3/a7
Beijing	As of August 1st, 2006, how many trains stop daily at the Beijing Railway Station or the Beijing West Railway Station?	167	hard	medium	data/set3/a7
Beijing	What is the name of a university (or similar institution for imparting higher education) in Beijing?	Tsinghua University	NULL	hard	data/set3/a7
Beijing	Are famous middle  schools  in Beijing :?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a7
Blaise_Pascal	Was Blaise Pascal a mathematician of the first order?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Was Blaise Pascal a mathematician of the first order?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Could Blaise Pascal move without crutches?	He could move without crutches until a paralytic attack in 1647.	easy	hard	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Could Blaise Pascal move without crutches?	no	easy	hard	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Has the name Pascal been given to the SI unit of pressure?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Has the name Pascal been given to the SI unit of pressure?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	From what did Pascal suffer throughout his life?	ill health	medium	medium	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	From what did Pascal suffer throughout his life?	poor health	medium	medium	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	What did Pascal argue was as perfect as possible?	the procedure used in geometry 	medium	medium	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	What did Pascal argue was as perfect as possible?	the procedure used in geometry	medium	medium	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	What is the best physician?	Time	medium	medium	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Who was the eldest sibling?	Gilberte	hard	hard	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Aside from the Provincial Letters' religious influence, were they popular as a literary work?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Aside from the Provincial Letters' religious influence, were they popular as a literary work?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a4
Blaise_Pascal	Of whose continual poor health was the cause never precisely determined?	Blaise Pascal	hard	hard	data/set4/a4
Cello	Is the violin cello a bowed string instrument?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Is the violin cello a bowed string instrument?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Is the purfling just for decoration?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Are the z-holes used as access points to the interior of the cello? 	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Are the z-holes used as access points to the interior of the cello? 	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	What does violincello mean?	Violincello means "little violene".	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	What are the two materials that bows are made of traditionally? 	Traditionally, bows are made from pernambuco or brazilwood.	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	What is used to tune a cello?	Pegs are used to tune a cello.	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	What is used to tune a cello?	the pegs	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	Which harmonics can produce any notes above middle C? 	Artificial harmonics can produce any notes above middle C.	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Cello	Which harmonics can produce any notes above middle C? 	Artificial harmonics	hard	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	Who referred to the cello as \93basso de viola da braccio"?	Monteverdi referred to the cello as "basso de viola da braccio".	hard	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	Who referred to the cello as \93basso de viola da braccio"?	Monteverdi	hard	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	Where is the violincello held?	The violincello is held on the shoulder.	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Cello	Where is the violincello held?	on the shoulder	hard	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	Is there cello in performances by Rihanna?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Is there cello in performances by Rihanna?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Are cellos constructed with glue?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Are cellos constructed with glue?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Is the cello a stringed instrument?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	Is the cello a stringed instrument?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Cello	What is cello an abbreviation of?	violoncello	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	What is cello an abbreviation of?	violoncello	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	What position is used to play the cello?	a gamba	medium	hard	data/set2/a9
Cello	What position is used to play the cello?	seated	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	What is a person who plays the cello called?	cellist	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	What is a person who plays the cello called?	cellist	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Cello	Why is there purling on a cello?	to stop cracks from forming ****misspelled****	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Cello	When did the first educational works appear for the cello?	the 18th century	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Cello	When did the first educational works appear for the cello?	18th century	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Cello	What cello manufacturer should I buy from if I want to play outside?	Luis & Clark	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Cello	What cello manufacturer should I buy from if I want to play outside?	Luis & Clark	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb a member of the National Institute?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb a member of the National Institute?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb find any relationship between electric charges and magnetic poles? 	No	easy	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb find any relationship between electric charges and magnetic poles? 	No	easy	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb's father's family in Montpellier? 	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb's father's family in Montpellier? 	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Where did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb die?	Charles-Augustin de Coulomb died in Paris.	medium	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Where did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb die?	Paris, France	medium	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	When was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb permanently stationed in Paris?	Charles-Augustin de Coulomb was permanently stationed in Paris in 1781.	medium	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	When was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb permanently stationed in Paris?	Yes	medium	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	What contribution did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb make to the field of geotechnical engineering?	Retaining wall design	medium	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Where did the construction of Fort Bourbon take place?	The construction of Fort Bourbon took place in Martinique.	hard	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Where did the construction of Fort Bourbon take place?	Martinique 	hard	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	What is the definition of the electrostatic force of attraction and repulsion? 	Coulomb's law is the definition of the electrostatic force of attraction and repulsion.	hard	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	What is the definition of the electrostatic force of attraction and repulsion? 	Coulomb's Law	hard	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	When did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb retire to a small estate he possessed at Blois?	Charles-Augustin de Coulomb retired to a small estate he possessed at Blois on the outbreak of the revolution in 1789.	hard	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	When did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb retire to a small estate he possessed at Blois?	1789	hard	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	If Charles-Augustin de Coulomb was alive today, how old would he have been?	273	NULL	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	For how many years did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb live?	70	NULL	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb live to be 80 years old?	no	NULL	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	How old was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb when he died?	1806	NULL	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	How many years ago did he resign his appointment as intendant de eaux et fontaine ?	220	NULL	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	How many years ago did Charles-Augustin de Coulomb die?	203	NULL	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was The SI  unit  of charge , the  coulomb , named after him?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was coulomb born in Angoulême,  France ,  to a well  to do  family?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was his father ,  Henri  Coulomb , inspector of the Royal  Fields  in Montpellier?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Is coulomb distinguished in the history  of mechanics  and  of electricity and  magnetism?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was Charles Augustin  de Coulomb  ( born  June  14 ,  1736 ,  Angoulême ,  France  -  died August 23 ,  1806 ,  Paris ,  France  ) a French  physicist?	yes	NULL	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Does Coulomb leave a legacy?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	When was Charles-Augustin de Coulomb born?	June 14, 1736	NULL	medium	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Did he publish an important investigation of the laws of friction?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was Coulomb born in Angoulême, France, to a well to do family?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Was his father inspector of the Royal Fields?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	He discovered an inverse relationship of what?	distance and electric force	NULL	hard	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Is it true that coulomb leaves a legacy as a hero?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a6
Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb	Where is Charles-Augustin de Coulomb from?	France	NULL	medium	data/set4/a6
Chinese_language	What was Chinese language`s profession?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	What is Chinese language`s first name?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	What is Chinese language`s last name?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	How many offspring did Chinese language have?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	The Mandarin dialects in which location have experienced a dramatic decrease in sounds and so have far more multisyllabic words than most other spoken varieties?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Was Old Chinese wholly uninflected?	no	NULL	easy	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	In North Korea, has Hanja been discontinued?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	The most  widespread is the Palladius  system?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Is the Vietnamese  term  for Chinese writing Hán t?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Did the Empire have little success?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	When are most of these groups mutually unintelligible?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	What is the population of Chinese language?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Is the most widespread the Palladius system?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Are most of these groups mutually unintelligible?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	In what country is Chinese language located?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Are The modern Chinese dialects more like a family?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Is it true that one-fifth of world population speak some form of Chinese?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	One-fifth of world population speak some form of what?	Chinese	NULL	medium	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Is mandarin spoken Chinese distinguished by its high level?	no, it's distinguished by diversity	NULL	easy	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Is standard Mandarin language of People Republic?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Are there many systems of romanization for the chinese languages due to the Chinese`s own lack of phonetic transcription until modern times ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	May the idea of Chinese as a language family suggest that the chinese identity is much more fragmentary and disunified than Chinese language actually is and as such is often looked upon as culturally and politically provocative ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Are most chinese words formed out of native chinese morphemes , including words describing imported objects and ideas ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	May a native of Guangzhou speak Standard Cantonese and putonghua , a resident of Taiwan , both taiwanese and putonghua/guoyu ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Refer most chinese and chinese linguists to chinese as a single language and Chinese language`s subdivisions dialects , while others call chinese a language family ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Chinese_language	Are there between 7 and 13 main regional groups of Chinese , of which the most spoken , by far , is about 850 million , followed by 90 million , 70 million and 70 million ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a7
Copenhagen	Copenhagen is the capital of what country?	Denmark	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	Copenhagen is the capital of what country?	Denmark	easy	medium	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	What is the population of Copenhagen?	1,161,063	easy	medium	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	What is the population of Copenhagen?	1,153,615	easy	hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	What transnational bridge was completed in 2000?	Oresund Bridge	easy	medium	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	What transnational bridge was completed in 2000?	Oresund Bridge	easy	hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	Why is Copenhagen a regional hub?	Its strategic location and excellent infrastructure	medium	hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	Why is Copenhagen a regional hub?	Its strategic location and excellent infrastructure with the largest airport in Scandinavia[6] located 14 minutes by train from the city centre	medium	hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	What happened to Copenhagen between 1251 and 1255?	a bunch of things	medium	too hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	Is Copenhagen completely surrounded with water? 	No	medium	hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	Copenhagen is ranked number one worldwide for which things?	Most Livable City in the World, 	hard	too hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	Copenhagen is ranked number one worldwide for which things?	Most Livable City, Location Ranking Survey	hard	too hard	data/set3/a8
Copenhagen	Why did German troops occupy Copenhagen?	Because it was WW2	hard	too hard	data/set3/a8
Cymbal	Have cymbals been used historically to suggest bacchanal?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Have cymbals been used historically to suggest bacchanal?	Yes	easy	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Can the origins of cymbals be traced to prehistoric times?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Can the origins of cymbals be traced to prehistoric times?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Are cymbals used in moden orchestras?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Are cymbals used in moden orchestras?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What are the most common Cymbals?	 The most common Cymbals are the Hi-Hats, Crash, Splash, Ride, and China.	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What are the most common Cymbals?	Hi-Hats, Crash, Splash, Ride, and China	medium	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is the second main orchestral use of cymbals?	The suspended cymbal is the second main orchestral use of symbals.	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is the second main orchestral use of cymbals?	The suspended cymbal	medium	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What have clash cymbals traditionally been accompanied by?	Clash cymbals have traditionally been accompanied by the bass drum playing an identical part.	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What have clash cymbals traditionally been accompanied by?	The bass drum playing an identical part	medium	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What happens when the center of a Cymbal is hit?	It causes a sound which is in a higher register than the rest of the symbal.	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What happens when the center of a Cymbal is hit?	It causes a sound which is in a higher register than the rest of the cymbal	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is an effective way to accentuate a note?	Playing a bass drum playing an identical part is an effective way to accentuate a note.	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is an effective way to accentuate a note?	The combination of a clash cymbol being accompanied by a bass drum playing an identical part, played loudly	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	From what type of Cymbals can a expert player obtain an enormous dynamic range?	An expert player can obtain an enormous dynamic range from crash cymbals.	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	From what type of Cymbals can a expert player obtain an enormous dynamic range?	Crash cymbals	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Can the origins of cymbals be traced back to prehistoric times?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Can the origins of cymbals be traced back to prehistoric times?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Did the modern hi-hat evolve from clash cymbals?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Did the modern hi-hat evolve from clash cymbals?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Is the word cymbal derived from a Germanic word?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	Is the word cymbal derived from a Germanic word?	No	easy	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is the center of a cymbal called?	Bell	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is the center of a cymbal called?	bell	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What part of the cymbal gets the best "crash"?	Edge or rim	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What part of the cymbal gets the best "crash"?	edge or rim	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is the second main orchestral use of cymbals?	the suspended cymbal	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What is the second main orchestral use of cymbals?	the suspended cymbal	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What two instruments form the modern drum kit?	the cymbals and the drum	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What Greek mythical creatures were depicted holding cymbals?	fauns and satyrs	hard	too hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What Greek mythical creatures were depicted holding cymbals?	fauns and satyrs	hard	too hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What are orchestral crash cymbals technically called?	a pair of clash cymbals	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Cymbal	What are orchestral crash cymbals technically called?	clash cymbals	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Dhaka	Is Dhaka the capital of Bangladesh?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Dhaka	Is Dhaka located on the eastern banks of the Buriganga River?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a3
Dhaka	Is University of Dhaka the largest public university in Dhaka?	Yes	easy	hard	data/set3/a3
Dhaka	How much area does Dhaka cover?	1462.60 square kilometers	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Dhaka	How many people did the 1970 Bhola cyclone kill?	500,000	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Dhaka	When is the end of the independence war of Bangladesh?	December 16, 1971	medium	hard	data/set3/a3
Dhaka	Did the Mughals arrive in Dhaka?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a3
Dhaka	Is University of Dhaka older than the Dhaka College?	No	hard	hard	data/set3/a3
English_language	What is given for the number of native speakers?	No figure is given for the number of native speakers.	NULL	hard	data/set5/a1
English_language	Is english an intonation  language?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Is english a de  jure  official  language  of Israel?	no	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Is the stressed  syllable called the nuclear  syllable?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Does english grammar have minimal inflection?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Did old English develop into Middle English?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Are books, magazines, and newspapers written in English available?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Is the syntax of German different with different rules?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Is it true that semantics causes a number of false friends?	true	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Here , are all syllables unstressed , except the syllables/words best and done , which are stressed ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Are many words describing the navy , types of ships , and other objects or activities on the water of dutch origin ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
English_language	Are local variations in the formal written version of the language quite limited , being restricted largely to the spelling differences between British and American English ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a1
Flute	Is the flute a musical instrument?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Flute	Is the flute a musical instrument?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Flute	Is it possible to open flutes at one or both ends?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Flute	Is it possible to open flutes at one or both ends?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Flute	Are Indian concert flutes available in standard pitches?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Flute	Are Indian concert flutes available in standard pitches?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Flute	What do we refer musicians who play flute?	A flute player, a flautist or a flutist. 	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Flute	What do we refer musicians who play flute?	A flute player, a flautist, or a flutist	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Flute	When was a three-holed flute made from a mammoth tusk discovered?	2004.	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Flute	When was a three-holed flute made from a mammoth tusk discovered?	In 2004	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Flute	When did the tin whistle first appear?	12th century.	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Flute	When did the tin whistle first appear?	In the 12th century	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Flute	What are the oldest known musical instruments?	A three holed-flute made from a mammoth tusk and two flutes made from swan's bones.	hard	medium	data/set2/a5
Flute	What are the oldest known musical instruments?	A three-holed flute made from a mammoth tusk and two flutes made from swans' bones are among the oldest known musical instruments	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Flute	When was the pan flute spread to other parts of Europe?	7th century BC.	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Flute	When was the pan flute spread to other parts of Europe?	After the 7th century BC	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Flute	What does the air stream across this hole create?	A Bernoulli, or siphon.	hard	medium	data/set2/a5
Fox	Are foxes wary of humans?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Fox	Are foxes wary of humans?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Fox	Are fennec foxes endangered?	no	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Fox	Are fennec foxes endangered?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Fox	Does the diet of foxes include reptiles?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Fox	Does the diet of foxes include reptiles?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Fox	How long do most foxes live?	Most foxes live 2 to 3 years, but they can survive for up to 10 years or even longer in captivity.	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	How long do most foxes live?	2 to 3 years	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	In what country did fox hunting originate?	the United Kingdom	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	In what country did fox hunting originate?	in the United Kingdom	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	What is the smallest species of fox?	The Fennec Fox is the smallest species of fox. 	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	What is the smallest species of fox?	the Fennec Fox	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	What are female foxes called?	vixens	hard	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	What are female foxes called?	vixens	hard	medium	data/set1/a6
Fox	What is caching food?	Caching is burying it for later consumption, usually under leaves, snow, or soil.	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Fox	What is caching food?	burying it for later consumption	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Fox	Do foxes damage fruit on farms?	No	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
French_language	How many years ago did African people spread across 31 francophone African countries can speak French either as a first or second language?	2 years ago	NULL	hard	data/set5/a5
French_language	In Old French, was the plural  for animal animals?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a5
French_language	Is catalan the only  official  language  of Andorra?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a5
French_language	In Belgium, however, is quatre-vingts universally used?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a5
French_language	Where is it an official language?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a5
French_language	Is french taught in many schools as a primary language along with Arabic?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a5
French_language	What is widely used by the Lebanese, especially for administrative purposes?	French	NULL	medium	data/set5/a5
French_language	Is french descendant of the Latin language?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a5
French_language	Are there also a variety of regional languages In addition?	Yes	NULL	medium	data/set5/a5
French_language	Is it true that france signed the European Charter for Regional Languages?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a5
French_language	France signed the European Charter for what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a5
French_language	Is french language of 20  %?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a5
French_language	Is French language of Wallonia?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a5
French_language	Are the prefixes en- and em- always nasalized ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a5
French_language	Are French and German not official languages nor recognised minority languages in the flemish region , although there are a dozen municipalities with language facilities for French-speakers ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a5
French_language	Can the palatal nasal occur in word initial position ( e.g ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a5
German_language	How many years ago was the Luther Bible by Martin Luther printed?	475	NULL	hard	data/set5/a2
German_language	Is german an inflected  language?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	In Switzerland, is ß used at all?	no	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Are there two common  word  orders?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Are feminines declined in the singular?	no	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Is 9 %  of the Internet  population German?	no	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Is german written using the Latin  alphabet?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Was the Luther Bible by Martin Luther printed?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Does a  tz indicate that the preceding vowel is short?	no	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Are there 622,650 speakers of German In Canada?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Are there also large populations of German ancestry In Mexico?	yes	NULL	medium	data/set5/a2
German_language	Would Bundesländer not accept North Rhine Westphalia and Bavaria ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
German_language	Have adverbs of time to appear in the third place in the sentence , just after the predicate ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a2
Giraffe	Do both sexes of giraffe have horns?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Do both sexes of giraffe have horns?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Do giraffes give birth standing up?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Do giraffes give birth standing up?	yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Are giraffes hunted for their hides?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Are giraffes hunted for their hides?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	What areas can giraffes inhabit?	savannas, grasslands, or open woodlands	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	What areas can giraffes inhabit?	inhabit savannas, grasslands, or open woodlands	medium	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	What will a giraffe use to clean off any bugs that appear on its face?	extremely long tongue 	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	What will a giraffe use to clean off any bugs that appear on its face?	It's extremely long tongue	medium	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	How do giraffes defend themselves?	with a powerful kick	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	How do giraffes defend themselves?	With powerful kicks	medium	easy	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Do male giraffes weigh more than female giraffes?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Do male giraffes weigh more than female giraffes?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Do male giraffes have larger horns than female giraffes?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Do male giraffes have larger horns than female giraffes?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
Giraffe	Are male females generally taller than female giraffes?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel one of the discoverers of radioactivity?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel one of the discoverers of radioactivity?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Is the SI unit for radioactivity named after him?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Is the SI unit for radioactivity named after him?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel a French physicist?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel a French physicist?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	In what year did Henri Becquerel die?	1908	medium	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	In what year did Henri Becquerel die?	August 24, 1908	medium	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Where was Henri Becquerel born?	 Paris 	medium	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Where was Henri Becquerel born?	Paris	medium	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	In what year did Henri Becquerel win the Nobel Prize in Physics?	1903	medium	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	In what year did Henri Becquerel win the Nobel Prize in Physics?	1903	medium	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel first in his family to occupy the physics chair at the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle?	No	hard	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel first in his family to occupy the physics chair at the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle?	No	hard	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel the sole winner of the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics?	No	hard	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Henri Becquerel the sole winner of the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics?	No	hard	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Did Henri Becquerel intentionally discover radioactivity?	No	hard	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Did Henri Becquerel intentionally discover radioactivity?	He discovered it accidentally	hard	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	If Henri Becquerel was alive today, how old would he have been?	157	NULL	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	For how many years did Henri Becquerel live?	56	NULL	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Did Henri Becquerel live to be 80 years old?	no	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	What was Henri Becquerel`s profession?	physisist	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	How old was Henri Becquerel when he died?	53	NULL	too hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	How many years ago was it when he became the third in his family to occupy the physics chair at the Musum National d`Histoire Naturelle?	117	NULL	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	In 1908, the year  of his death, was Becquerel elected Permanent Secretary  of the Académie  des  Sciences?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	When was Henri Becquerel born?	December 15, 1852	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Did he become chief engineer in the Department of Bridges and Highways?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Did he share the Nobel Prize in Physics?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Is it true that Becquerel wrapped a fluorescent substance in photographic plates?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Becquerel wrapped a fluorescent substance in what?	photographic plates and black material	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Is there a Becquerel crater on the Moon for radioactivity?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Must … One conclude from these experiments that the phosphorescent substance in question emits rays which pass through the opaque paper and reduces silver salts ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	What is Henri Becquerel?	Henri Becquerel was a famous physicist.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Where is Henri Becquerel from?	Paris	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	What does Henri Becquerel do?	was a physisist	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	What does Henri Becquerel do?	Henri Becquerel was a physicist.	NULL	hard	data/set4/a9
Isaac_Newton	Was Newton a English physicist?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Was Newton a English physicist?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Did Newton reject the church's doctrine of the Trinity?	Newton may have rejected the church's doctrine of the Trinity.	easy	hard	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Did Newton reject the church's doctrine of the Trinity?	Maybe	easy	hard	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Was Newton admitted into Havard College?	No.	easy	easy	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Was Newton admitted into Havard College?	Maybe, but it doesn't say so in the article	easy	easy	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	When was Newton's date of birth recorded?	Christmas Day, Decembeer 25, 1642.	medium	medium	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	When was Newton's date of birth recorded?	his date of birth was recorded as Christmas Day, December 25, 1642	medium	easy	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	How many laws of motion did Netwon have?	Three	medium	medium	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	How many laws of motion did Netwon have?	Three	medium	easy	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Who did Newton see as the master creator?	God	medium	medium	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Who did Newton see as the master creator?	Newton saw God as the master creator whose existence could not be denied in the face of the grandeur of all creation	medium	easy	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	When did Netwon investigate the refraction of light	From 1670 to 1672	hard	hard	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	When did Netwon investigate the refraction of light	1670-1672	hard	hard	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What principles did Newton explain for mechanics?	The principles of conservation of momentum and angular momentum	hard	hard	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What principles did Newton explain for mechanics?	In mechanics, Newton enunciated the principles of conservation of momentum and angular momentum	hard	medium	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Interaction with what man stirred up Newton's interest in alchemy?	Henry More	hard	hard	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Interaction with what man stirred up Newton's interest in alchemy?	The contact with the theosophist Henry More, revived his interest in alchemy	hard	medium	data/set4/a1
Italian_language	What was Italian language`s profession?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	What is Italian language`s first name?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	What is Italian language`s last name?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	How many offspring did Italian language have?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Where did Italian language die?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Are geminate plosives and affricates realised as lengthened closures?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Where is this letter silent?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Is Italian one of official four languages?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Is it true that legge sulle fonti del diritto of 7?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Legge sulle fonti del diritto of what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Is it true that Italian retained the contrast between short consonants?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Italian retained the contrast between what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Is stress distinctive in most Romance languages?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Are the speakers who use italian as a second or cultural language estimated at around 110-120 million ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Are front/back vowel rules for C and G similar in French , Romanian , Spanish , and to some extent English ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	So can Italian language hear "istànbul " or "Ìstanbul" ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Will , the vowel sounds be pronounced separately) ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Can Regional differences be recognized by various factors : the openness of vowels , the length of the consonants , and influence of the local dialect ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
Italian_language	Give dictionaries the latter as an alternative pronunciation ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a9
James_Watt	James Watt's improvements of what were fundamental to the changes wrought by the Industrial Revolution?	The steam engine.	easy	medium	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	James Watt's improvements of what were fundamental to the changes wrought by the Industrial Revolution?	steam engine	easy	hard	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	James Watt was born where?	Greenock, a seaport on the Firth of Clyde	easy	medium	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	What was the name of James Watt's mother?	Agnus Muirhead	easy	medium	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	What was the name of James Watt's mother?	Agnes Muirhead	easy	hard	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	How many of James Watt's children did not live to adulthood?	3	medium	hard	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	How many of James Watt's children did not live to adulthood?	3	medium	too hard	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	James Watt ranked first among how many people in Charles Murray's survey of historiometry?	229	medium	medium	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	James Watt ranked first among how many people in Charles Murray's survey of historiometry?	229	medium	hard	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	In what year did James travel to Lodon to study instrument-making?	1753	hard	hard	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	For how many years of James Watt's life was his mother alive?	17 years	hard	hard	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	What is James Watt most famous for?	Steam engine.	hard	too hard	data/set4/a2
Japanese_language	What was Japanese language`s profession?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	What is Japanese language`s first name?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Is the basic sentence structure topic-comment?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Where are the circumstances complicated?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Does the   form indicate a perfect tense?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Is or a conception that forms the counterpart of dialect?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Do most Japanese people employ politeness?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Is it true that Japanese borrowed a considerable number of words?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Japanese borrowed a considerable number of what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Is japanese language in the island?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Is there a form of the language?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Are the several dialects of Kagoshima famous to speakers?	yes	NULL	medium	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	I.e "yamato words ") , which in scholarly contexts is sometimes referred to as ( or rarely , i.e "yamato words " -rrb- , which in scholarly contexts is sometimes referred to as -lrb- or rarely , vp ? ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Are japanese personal pronouns generally used only in situations requiring special emphasis as to who is doing what to whom ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	: give "please Japanese language to Mr ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Will a japanese person use vocabulary and inflections of the honorific register to refer to the in-group superior and Japanese language`s or Japanese language`s speech and actions ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Japanese_language	Thus , can polite korean speech sound very presumptuous when translated verbatim into Japanese , as in korean Japanese language is acceptable and normal to say things like "our Mr ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a6
Lima	Is Lima the capital of Peru?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Lima	Is the Museum of Gold in Lima?	Yes.	easy	hard	data/set3/a4
Lima	Does Lima have volleyball venues?	Yes.	easy	hard	data/set3/a4
Lima	When was Lima founded?	January 18,1535.	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Lima	Where is the Park of the Reserve located?	Near the downtown area.	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Lima	What is a colectivo?	Automobiles that renders express service on some major roads of the Lima Metropolitan Area.	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Lima	Is the National University of San Marcos in Lima?	Yes.	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Lima	Has the San Lorenzo Megaport Project been completed?	No.	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Lima	How many years ago was the Lima Stock Exchange the most profitable in the world?	Three	NULL	hard	data/set3/a4
Lima	Is rainfall very low?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a4
Lima	Is lima the capital  and  largest  city  of Peru?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a4
Lima	Is The GDP  per capita in Lima $ 7,600  /  ref )?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a4
Lima	The Spanish Crown named Pizarro governor of what?	Hemming.	NULL	medium	data/set3/a4
Lima	Is it true that the ideas of the Enlightenment shaped the development of the city?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a4
Lima	The ideas of the Enlightenment shaped the development of what?	the city, Lima	NULL	medium	data/set3/a4
London	Is London the capital of the United Kingdom?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
London	Is London the capital of the United Kingdom?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
London	Does London's population draw from a wide range of religions?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
London	Does London's population draw from a wide range of religions?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
London	Did Caunte take control of the English throne in 101?	No	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
London	Over how many languages are spoken in London?	Over 300 languages are spoken in london	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
London	Over how many languages are spoken in London?	Over 300	medium	easy	data/set3/a1
London	What had the Anglo-Saxons created by the 600s?	By the 600s, the Anglo-Saxons had created a new settlement called Lundenwic.	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
London	What had the Anglo-Saxons created by the 600s?	a new settlement called Lundenwic	medium	easy	data/set3/a1
London	What city in the UK has been subjected to bouts of terrorism?	London has been subjected to bouts of terrorism.	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
London	What city in the UK has been subjected to bouts of terrorism?	London	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
London	What countries did James VI of Scotland unite?	James VI of Scotland united Scotland and England.	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
London	What countries did James VI of Scotland unite?	England and Scotland	hard	too hard	data/set3/a1
London	How did civil wars affect England during the Middle Ages?	London remained relatively untouched	hard	medium	data/set3/a1
Lyre	Are the strings of a classical lyre made of gut?	Yes	easy	hard	data/set2/a10
Lyre	Does a classical lyre have a sound-chest?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a10
Lyre	Is lyre played in mordern Greece?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a10
Lyre	Which part of the strings does the left hand touch?	The lower strings	medium	medium	data/set2/a10
Lyre	In which place is lyre still played?	North-eastern parts of Africa	medium	medium	data/set2/a10
Lyre	Does a classical lyre have a fingerboard?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a10
Lyre	Is a guitar played with a plectrum like a lyre?	Yes	hard	easy	data/set2/a10
Michael_Faraday	Was Michael Faraday an English chemist?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was Michael Faraday an English chemist?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was Faraday a devout Christian?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was Faraday a devout Christian?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was Faraday considered a gentleman?	no	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was Faraday considered a gentleman?	no	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Who was a member of the Sandemanian sect of Christianity?	yes	medium	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Who was a member of the Sandemanian sect of Christianity?	Faraday	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What did Joseph Henry likely discover?	self-induction	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What did Joseph Henry likely discover?	self-induction	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What did the University of Oxford grant Faraday?	a Doctor of Civil Law degree (honorary)	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What did the University of Oxford grant Faraday?	Doctor of Civil Law degree (honorary)	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Who was made to travel outside the coach?	Faraday	hard	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday construct the ancestor of modern power generators?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday construct the ancestor of modern power generators?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday lecture on education in 1854?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday lecture on education in 1854?	yes	hard	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday receive an extensive formal education?	no	easy	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday receive an extensive formal education?	no	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday discover the chemical substance benzene?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Did Faraday discover the chemical substance benzene?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was Faraday born in England?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was Faraday born in England?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What do some historians of science refer to Faraday as?	the best experimentalist in the history of science	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What do some historians of science refer to Faraday as?	best experimentalist in the history of science	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Who was the sponsor and mentor of Faraday?	John 'Mad Jack' Fuller	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Who was the sponsor and mentor of Faraday?	John 'Mad Jack' Fuller	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What did Faraday invent that is used almost universally in science laboratories?	the Bunsen burner	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What did Faraday invent that is used almost universally in science laboratories?	Bunsen burner	medium	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Does the production of chemical weapons raise an ethical issue?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What was the Faraday effect first called?	diamagnetism	hard	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What was the Faraday effect first called?	diamagnetism	hard	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Can you meet someone through attending a church?	yes	hard	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What was Michael Faraday`s birthplace?	Newington Butts	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	What was Michael Faraday`s profession?	chemist and physicist	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	How many years ago did Faraday report on the first synthesis of compound make from carbon and chlorine , c 2 h 6 and c 2 h 4 ?	189	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	How many years ago was it when he discovered the phenomenon that he named diamagnetism , and what is now called the Faraday effect?	164	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	How many years ago was it when Faraday wrote a letter to The Times on the subject of the foul condition of the River Thames , which resulted in an oft-reprinted cartoon in Punch?	154	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	How many years ago was it when he discovered that the optical properties of gold colloids differed from those of the corresponding bulk metal?	162	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was education another area  of service  for Faraday?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was faraday `s  earliest  chemical  work as an assistant  to Davy?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Who died at his house at Hampton Court on August 25, 1867?	Faraday	NULL	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	When was Michael Faraday born?	September 22, 1791	NULL	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Where did he serve two terms?	the Church of Scotland	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Who was born in Newington Butts, near present-day South London, England?	Michael Faraday	NULL	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Is it true that institution formed the foundation of electric motor technology?	no	NULL	hard	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Institution formed the foundation of what?	modern electromagnetic technology	NULL	medium	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was his father member of the Sandemanian sect?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a7
Michael_Faraday	Was faraday Christian of the small Sandemanian denomination?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a7
Nassau	Is Nassau Sound a body of water in Maine?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
Nassau	Was Nassau placed in operation by Robert Fulton?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
Nassau	Who was Fort Nassau built by?	the Dutch	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
Nassau	What is Nassau Coliseum?	an arena in Uniondale, New York, USA	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
Nassau	What was the Dead or Alive 4 fighting arena modeled after?	a Magnetic Accelerator Cannon station from Halo 2	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
Nassau	Is Nassau Range the highest mountain range in the world?	no	hard	easy	data/set3/a2
Nassau	Is Nassau County named after a German town?	yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a2
Nassau	Does the United States have a base near Glasgow?	yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a2
Nikola_Tesla	Did Tesla study electrical engineering?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Did Tesla study electrical engineering?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Was Tesla born in the United States?	No	easy	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Was Tesla born in the United States?	no	easy	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Was Tesla hired by Edison?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Was Tesla hired by Edison?	yes	easy	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	When did Tesla demonstrate wireless communication (radio)?	1893	medium	medium	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	When did Tesla demonstrate wireless communication (radio)?	1893	medium	hard	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	What is the SI unit measuring magnetic flux density or magnetic induction?	the tesla	medium	medium	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	What is the SI unit measuring magnetic flux density or magnetic induction?	the tesla	medium	medium	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Was Tesla regarded as a mad scientist?	Yes	medium	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Was Tesla regarded as a mad scientist?	yes	medium	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	What type of current did Tesla invent?	AC	hard	hard	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Who was the victor of the "War of Currents"?	Tesla	hard	hard	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Who was the victor of the "War of Currents"?	Nikola Tesla	hard	hard	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Where did Tesla study electrical engineering?	the Austrian Polytechnic in Graz 	hard	medium	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Where did Tesla study electrical engineering?	Austrian Polytechnic in Graz	hard	medium	data/set4/a3
Ottawa	Is Ottawa the capital of Canada?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Does Ottawa sit on the Ottowa River?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Do small tremors occur in Ottawa?	Yes	easy	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What is Ottawa's population?	1,190,982	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What are Ottawa's primary industries?	Logging and lumber	medium	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What is Ottawa's junior ice hockey team?	the Ottawa 67's	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What is Ottawa's major league hockey team?	the Ottawa Senators	hard	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What are Carleton University's athletic teams called?	Carleton Ravens	hard	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Is Ottawa colder than Moscow in January?	Yes	hard	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Is Ottawa on a river?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Is Ottawa on a river?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Does it snow in Ottawa?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Does it snow in Ottawa?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Was there a cholera outbreak in 1832?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Was there a cholera outbreak in 1832?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Who is the mayor of Ottawa?	Larry O'Brien	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Who is the mayor of Ottawa?	Larry O'Brien	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	How many townships are in Ottawa?	eleven	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	How many townships are in Ottawa?	eleven	medium	easy	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What's the main highway in Ottawa?	Highway 417, The Queensway	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What's the main highway in Ottawa?	provinical Highway 417	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What was Ottawa's name in 1850?	Bytown	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	What was Ottawa's name in 1850?	Bytown	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Based on the average, in what year will the next small tremor occur in Ottawa?	2009	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Based on the average, in what year will the next small tremor occur in Ottawa?	2009	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Where were immigrants from in the 1800s?	Irish	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Where were immigrants from in the 1800s?	Ireland	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ottawa	Are there also discussions of having OC Transpo Light Rail and STO Transitway networks linking on the Gatineau side of the Ottawa River ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Otter	Does the giant otter live in South America?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	Does the giant otter live in South America?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do otters have claws?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do otters have claws?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do otters eat fish?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do otters eat fish?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	What is an otter's den called?	A holt	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
Otter	What is an otter's den called?	holt	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
Otter	Where do sea otters live?	Beside water	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
Otter	Where do sea otters live?	Pacific coast of North America	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
Otter	Why are otters vulnerable to prey depletion?	Prey-dependence	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
Otter	Why are otters vulnerable to prey depletion?	prey-dependency	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do otters enjoy playing?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do otters enjoy playing?	yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do sea otters have a layer of fat like whales?	No	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
Otter	Do sea otters have a layer of fat like whales?	no	hard	easy	data/set1/a7
Otter	Is the otter in the same family as the badger?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
Otter	Is the otter in the same family as the badger?	yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a7
Santiago	Are there any cities named Santiago in the United States?	yes	easy	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Are there any cities named Santiago in the United States?	Yes	easy	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Was Santiago the name of an indie/punk band?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Was Santiago the name of an indie/punk band?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Is Santiago a name in Spanish?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Is Santiago a name in Spanish?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What is the origin of the name Santiago?	Spanish for St. James	medium	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What is the origin of the name Santiago?	sanit + iago, James	medium	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Who has released an album or song named Santiago?	The Chieftains; Loreena McKennitt	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Who has released an album or song named Santiago?	The Chieftains and Loreena McKennitt	medium	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What is the Order of Santiago?	a Spanish knightly order	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What is the Order of Santiago?	a Spanish Knightly order	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What notable people have been named Santiago?	Benito Santiago, Hugo Santiago, Joey Santiago, Liliana Santiago, Rafael Santiago Maria, Santiago Caballero, Santiago Cabrera; James, son of Zebedee	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What notable people have been named Santiago?	Benito, Hugo, and others	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What fictional stories include a main character named Santiago?	Gears of War, Rainbow Six: Covert Operations Essentials, Death Foretold by Gabriel García Márquez, Ernest Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea, the television series Babylon 5, Anne Rice's novel Interview with the Vampire, aulo Coelho's The Alchemist (novel), the television show Friday Night Lights	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What fictional stories include a main character named Santiago?	Interview with the Vampire, The Alchemist, and others	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Is Santiago the national capital of a country?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Is santiago Spanish for St. James  ( from santo ,  saint  +  iago ,  James  )?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Santiago	Is santiago Spanish for St. James?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Santiago	What is Santiago?	Santiago is Spanish for St. James. It is also the name of places in Argentina, Brazil, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Spain, the United States, Venezuela, and the Amazon. It is also the name of a baseball catcher, a film director, a guitarist, an economist, a footballer, a DJ, an actor, and James, son of Zebedee. Fictional people with this name include a character from Gears of War, a character from Chronicle of a Death Foretold, a character in Old Man and the Sea, a character in Babylon 5, a character in Interview with the Vampire, the main character of The Alchemist, and a character on Friday Night Lights. There has also been a battle of Santiago de Cuba, a couple of bands named Santiago, an Order of Santiago, and "Santiago" as a shortened form of the Reconquista battle cry.	NULL	too hard	data/set3/a6
Spanish_language	Are countries without in red?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	However, is English the official  language?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Are most Spanish  speakers in Latin America?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Are countries where is a regionalism in green?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	The deeper  the blue  is, is the more  predominant?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Are these marked with an asterisk  ( *  )?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Did the language lose its official status?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Where do about 400 million people speak Spanish?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	What kind of instrument is the spanish language?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Is the lexical similarity with Italian estimated at 82%?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Is spanish an official language of the European Union?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	What is an official language of the European Union?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Is it true that mexico contains the largest population of Spanish speakers?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Mexico contains the largest population of what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Is this phenomenon notable in Brazil?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Is spanish one of the official languages?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Is universidad de México Instituto Cervantes Spanish language of Spain?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Is spanish language of the European Union?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Pasan en consecuencia , las palabras que comienzan por estas dos letras , o que las contienen , a alfabetizarse en los lugares que les corresponden dentro de la c y de la l , respectivamente ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Spanish_language	Allow the common features of the writing systems of the Romance languages for a greater amount of interlingual reading comprehension than oral communication would ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a8
Swahili_language	What was Swahili language`s profession?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	How many years ago was an interterritorial conference held at Mombasa ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	What is Swahili language`s last name?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	How many years ago was it when the rulers of Zanzibar organized trading expeditions into the interior of the mainland , up to the various lakes in the continent `s Great Rift Valley?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	What is Swahili language`s first name?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Where did Swahili language die?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Has swahili no diphthongs?	No	NULL	easy	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Is a third  prefix the object  prefix?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	When is /ref>	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Swahili unusual?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Where does swahili grammar arrange nouns?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	What was the only good candidate in these two colonies?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Do some writers mark aspirated consonants?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Was one key step in spreading Swahili to create a standard written language?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Are there today more speakers in Kenya of the Somali coast?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Is      / ref Swahili unusual among sub-Saharan languages?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	The pronunciation of the phoneme / u / stands between what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set5/a4
Swahili_language	Are vowels never reduced , regardless of stress ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set5/a4
Swan	Does the Australian Black Swan have white feathers on its wings?	yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	Does the Australian Black Swan have white feathers on its wings?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	Do swans belong to the family Anatidae?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Do swans belong to the family Anatidae?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Can black swans swim with only one leg?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Can black swans swim with only one leg?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What are young swans known as?	cygnets	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What are young swans known as?	Cygnets	medium	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the Irish legend of the Children of Lir about?	a stepmother transforming her children into swans for 900 years	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the Irish legend of the Children of Lir about?	A stepmother transforming her children into swans for 900 years	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the Sanskrit word for swan?	hamsa or hansa	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the Sanskrit word for swan?	Hamsa or hansa	medium	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Which album was the song "The Bonny Swans" from?	The Mask and Mirror	hard	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	Which album was the song "The Bonny Swans" from?	The Mask and Mirror	hard	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the Polish word for swan?	&#321;ab&#281;d&#378;	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the Polish word for swan?	Łabędź	hard	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Which ballet by Pyotr Tchaikovsky is partially based on an Ancient German legend about a princess who was turned into a swan?	Swan Lake	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
Swan	Which ballet by Pyotr Tchaikovsky is partially based on an Ancient German legend about a princess who was turned into a swan?	Swan Lake	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
Swan	Are swan birds of the family Anatidae?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Are swan birds of the family Anatidae?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Do swans feature strongly in mythology?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Do swans feature strongly in mythology?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Is the Trumpeter Swan the largest bird?	It is the largest bird of North America.	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	Is the Trumpeter Swan the largest bird?	The Trumpeter Swan is the largest bird of North America	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the name of young swans?	Cygnets.	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the name of young swans?	Cygnets	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	Where is the word "swan" derived from?	Old English swan.	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	Where is the word "swan" derived from?	The Old English word "swan," derived from the Indo-European root "*swen", meaning to sound or to sing	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the best known story about a swan?	The Ugly Duckling fable.	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the best known story about a swan?	The Ugly Duckling	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	Are swans and ducks birds of the same family?	Yes.	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
Swan	Are swans and ducks birds of the same family?	Yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the name of an adult female?	Pen.	hard	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the name of an adult female?	An adult female swan is called a pen.	hard	medium	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the color of the Australian Black Swan?	Completely black except for the white flight feathers on its wings.	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
Swan	What is the color of the Australian Black Swan?	Completely black except for the white feathers on its wings	hard	medium	data/set1/a10
Tiger	Is the Tiger a member of the Felidar family?	No.	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Is the Tiger a member of the Felidar family?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Are tigers solitary animals?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Are tigers solitary animals?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Are panthers a type of tiger?	No.	easy	hard	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Are panthers a type of tiger?	No	easy	hard	data/set1/a3
Tiger	What do tigers' powerfully built legs and shoulders allow tigers to do?	They have the ability to pull down prey substantially heavier than themselves.	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
Tiger	What do tigers' powerfully built legs and shoulders allow tigers to do?	have the ability to pull down prey substantially heavier than themselves	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
Tiger	What would a tiger do when seized by a crocodile?	A tiger will strike at the reptile's eyes with its paws.	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
Tiger	What would a tiger do when seized by a crocodile?	strike at the reptile's eyes with its paws	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
Tiger	What are the typical features of a tiger country?	It will always have good cover, it will always be close to water and plenty of prey.	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
Tiger	What are the typical features of a tiger country?	Good cover, close to water, and plenty of prey 	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Would it be common for tigers to mate in January?	Yes.	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Would it be common for tigers to mate in January?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set1/a3
Tiger	About how many square kilometers would be needed to house 3 female tigers?	60 square kilometers	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
Tiger	About how many square kilometers would be needed to house 3 female tigers?	60	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
Tiger	Would a tiger be likely to feedon smaller animals, such as mice?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
Trumpet	Did the predecessors to trumpets have valves?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	Are trumpets constructed of brass?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	Is the bass trumpet the smallest trumpet?	No	easy	hard	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	What musical styles is the trumpet used in?	Ska, ska punk, classical, jazz, Rock, Blues, pop, polka, cuban music, mariachi and funk.	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	What is the most common type of trumpet?	The B trumpet.	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	How does a trumpet produce sound?	By blowing air through closed lips.	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	How do trumpets compensate for wolf tones?	Somce trumpetes have a slide mechanism built in to compensate.	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	Did Miles Davis play the trumpet?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Trumpet	Does a trumpet have a mellower tone than a cornet?	No	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Turtle	Is the name of the upper shell of a turtle called the plastron?	No.	easy	hard	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Do scutes fall away from the turtle's shell?	Some of the scutes eventually fall away from the shell.	easy	hard	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Do scutes fall away from the turtle's shell?	yes, eventually	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Do Terrestrial tortoises have short feet?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Do Terrestrial tortoises have short feet?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	How many groups are turtles broken down into?	Two	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
Turtle	How many groups are turtles broken down into?	two	medium	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Where are the only surviving giant tortoises?	They are on the Seychelles and Galápagos Islands.	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Where are the only surviving giant tortoises?	Seychelles and Gal\E1pagos Islands	medium	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	How do turtles chew food?	Turtles use their jaws to cut and chew food.	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
Turtle	How do turtles chew food?	Turtles use their jaws to cut and chew food	medium	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Are tortoises land based?	Yes.	hard	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Are tortoises land based?	yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Where are turtle eggs layed?	Turtles lay eggs on land.	hard	hard	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Where are turtle eggs layed?	on land	hard	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Is turtle soup considered a delicacy?	No.	hard	easy	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Is turtle soup considered a delicacy?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a4
Turtle	Are Testudines the crown group of the superorder Chelonia?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Are Testudines the crown group of the superorder Chelonia?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Do turtles breathe air?	yes	easy	hard	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Do turtles breathe air?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Are harvesting wild turtles legal anywhere?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Approximately how many species of Testudines are alive today?	300	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Approximately how many species of Testudines are alive today?	300	medium	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Where is harvesting wild turtles legal?	Florida	medium	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Where is harvesting wild turtles legal?	Florida	medium	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	What was the largest ever chelonian?	Archelon ischyros	medium	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	What was the largest ever chelonian?	The great letherback sea tutrtle	medium	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Is there a way to approximate the age of a turtle?	yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Is there a way to approximate the age of a turtle?	Yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Can turtles spend all their time underwater?	no	hard	too hard	data/set1/a9
Turtle	Can turtles spend all their time underwater?	No	hard	easy	data/set1/a9
Violin	Are violinists and fiddlers the same thing?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Violin	Are violinists and fiddlers the same thing?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Violin	Are violins a single size?	no	easy	hard	data/set2/a2
Violin	Are violins a single size?	No	easy	hard	data/set2/a2
Violin	Are violas and cellos in the same family of instruments as violins?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Violin	Are violas and cellos in the same family of instruments as violins?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Violin	Where does the word "violin" come from?	the Middle Latin word vitula, meaning "stringed instrument"	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Violin	Where does the word "violin" come from?	the Middle Latin word vitula	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Violin	What is someone who makes violins called?	a luthier, or simply a violin maker	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Violin	What is someone who makes violins called?	a luthier	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Violin	How many strings does a violin usually have?	four	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Violin	How many strings does a violin usually have?	4	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Violin	What are violins made of?	different types of wood	hard	medium	data/set2/a2
Violin	What are violins made of?	maple, ebony, sheep gut	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Violin	How long have people been making instruments like violins?	since ancient times	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Violin	How long have people been making instruments like violins?	since 1555	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Violin	Whate is the usual pitch range of a violin?	from G3 to C8	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Violin	Whate is the usual pitch range of a violin?	from G3 to C8	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Xylophone	Are xylophone bars made of rosewood?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	Is the xylophone a precursor to the vibraphone?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	Were ancient mallets made of copper?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	Where did the xylophone originate?	Indonesia	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	What is the earliest historical reference in Europe?	Arnold Schlick's Spiegel der Orgelmacher und Organisten	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	How are western-style xylophones characterised?	by a bright, sharp tone and high register	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	Can a xylophone be 3 octaves?	yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	Can a short bar follow a long bar?	no	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Xylophone	Did vibraphones exist in 1930?	yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
ArticleTitle	Question	Answer	DifficultyFromQuestioner	DifficultyFromAnswerer	ArticleFile
Abraham_Lincoln	Was Abraham Lincoln the sixteenth President of the United States?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Was Abraham Lincoln the sixteenth President of the United States?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln sign the National Banking Act of 1863?	yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln sign the National Banking Act of 1863?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did his mother die of pneumonia?	no	easy	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did his mother die of pneumonia?	No.	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	How many long was Lincoln's formal education?	18 months	medium	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	How many long was Lincoln's formal education?	18 months.	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When did Lincoln begin his political career?	1832	medium	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When did Lincoln begin his political career?	1832.	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	What did The Legal Tender Act of 1862 establish?	the United States Note, the first paper currency in United States history	medium	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	What did The Legal Tender Act of 1862 establish?	The United States Note, the first paper currency in United States history.	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Who suggested Lincoln grow a beard?	11-year-old Grace Bedell	hard	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Who suggested Lincoln grow a beard?	Grace Bedell.	hard	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When did the Gettysburg address argue that America was born?	1776	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When did the Gettysburg address argue that America was born?	1776.	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln beat John C. Breckinridge in the 1860 election?	yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln beat John C. Breckinridge in the 1860 election?	Yes.	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Was Abraham Lincoln the first President of the United States?	No	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Was Abraham Lincoln the first President of the United States?	No	easy	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln start his political career in 1832?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln start his political career in 1832?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln ever represent Alton & Sangamon Railroad?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln ever represent Alton & Sangamon Railroad?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Which county was Lincoln born in?	Hardin County	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Which county was Lincoln born in?	Southeast Hardin County, Kentucky	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When did Lincoln first serve as President?	March 4, 1861	medium	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When did Lincoln first serve as President?	March 4, 1861	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Who assassinated Lincoln?	John Wilkes Booth	medium	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Who assassinated Lincoln?	John Wilkes Booth	medium	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln win the election of 1860?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln win the election of 1860?	Yes	hard	too hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Who was the general in charge at the Battle of Antietam?	General McClellan	hard	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Who was the general in charge at the Battle of Antietam?	John Alexander McClernand	hard	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Why did Lincoln issue the Emancipation Proclamation?	To free slaves 	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Why did Lincoln issue the Emancipation Proclamation?	The goal was to weaken the rebellion, which was led and controlled by slave owners.	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Do scholars rank lincoln among the top three presidents?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Do scholars rank lincoln among the top three presidents?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did lincoln have 18 months of schooling?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did lincoln have 18 months of schooling?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Was Lincoln chosen as a presidential candidate in 1860?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Was Lincoln chosen as a presidential candidate in 1860?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	How old was Lincoln in 1816?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	How old was Lincoln in 1816?	seven	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When was the first photgraph of lincoln taken?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	When was the first photgraph of lincoln taken?	1846	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	How long was Lincoln's legal Career?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	How long was Lincoln's legal Career?	23 years	medium	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	What trail did Lincoln use a Farmers' Almanac in? 	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	What trail did Lincoln use a Farmers' Almanac in? 	he defended William "Duff" Armstrong	hard	hard	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Abraham Lincoln live in the Frontier?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Abraham Lincoln live in the Frontier?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln's Wife's Family support slavery?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a4
Abraham_Lincoln	Did Lincoln's Wife's Family support slavery?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a4
Alessandro_Volta	Volta became professor of physics in the Como high school in what year?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What ac phaenomenis inde pendentibus?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What may be called Volta's Law of the electrochemical series?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is it true that volta became professor of physics?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is it true that volta entered retirement in spain?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	When did he become professor?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What did Alessandro Volta publish in 1800?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is Volta buried in the city of Como?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is the electrolyte sulphuric acid?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	NOTTTT  FOUND	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Are Count Volta 's original instruments and papers on display there ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Is Volta buried in the city of Como ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Was his 1800 paper written in French ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Are Count Volta 's original instruments and papers on display there ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Did he not realize that the frog 's leg served as both a conductor of electricity -LRB- we would now call it an electrolyte -RRB- and as a detector of electricity ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	Does this not make the zinc rod the negative electrode and the copper rod the positive electrode ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What happened with $ its invention?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	HWhat happened at the electromotive force -LRB- emf -RRB- of a galvanic cell?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Alessandro_Volta	What happened in 1800?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a10
Amedeo_Avogadro	What was an Italian savant?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What was an Italian savant?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who is most noted for his contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight?	Amedeo Avogadro	NULL	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who is most noted for his contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who is most noted for his contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who graduated in ecclesiastical law at the early age of 20 and began to practice?	Amedeo Avogadro	NULL	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who graduated in ecclesiastical law at the early age of 20 and began to practice?	blah	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who graduated in ecclesiastical law at the early age of 20 and began to practice?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	When did he publish another memoria?	1821	NULL	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	When did he publish another memoria?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	When did he publish another memoria?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	When did he become a professor?	1820	NULL	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	When did he become a professor?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	When did he become a professor?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is it true that he became a professor in 1820?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is it true that he became a professor in 1820?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is it true that he became a professor in 1820?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro an Italian savant?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro an Italian savant?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro an Italian savant?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Amedeo Avogadro born in Turin August 9th 1776 to a noble ancient family of Piedmont, Italy?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Amedeo Avogadro born in Turin August 9th 1776 to a noble ancient family of Piedmont, Italy?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was Amedeo Avogadro born in Turin August 9th 1776 to a noble ancient family of Piedmont, Italy?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is he most noted for his contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is he most noted for his contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is he most noted for his contributions to the theory of molarity and molecular weight?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who confirm that he sponsored and helped some Sardinian plotters who were organising a revolution in that island , stopped at the very last moment by the concession of Charles Albert 's statute ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Who confirm that he sponsored and helped some Sardinian plotters who were organising a revolution in that island , stopped at the very last moment by the concession of Charles Albert 's statute ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	He is what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	He is what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	The unification of Italy did what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was King Victor Emmanuel III there to pay homage to Avogadro ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was King Victor Emmanuel III there to pay homage to Avogadro ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was King Victor Emmanuel III there to pay homage to Avogadro ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is Avogadro 's number commonly used to compute the results of chemical reactions ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is Avogadro 's number commonly used to compute the results of chemical reactions ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is Avogadro 's number commonly used to compute the results of chemical reactions ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is it approximately 6.0221415 10 23 ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Is it approximately 6.0221415 10 23 ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did the scientific community not reserve great attention to his theory ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did the scientific community not reserve great attention to his theory ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Did the scientific community not reserve great attention to his theory ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Does it not allow chemists to determine the exact amounts of substances produced in a given reaction ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Does it not allow chemists to determine the exact amounts of substances produced in a given reaction ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was King Victor Emmanuel III there to pay homage to Avogadro ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was King Victor Emmanuel III there to pay homage to Avogadro ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Was King Victor Emmanuel III there to pay homage to Avogadro ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Can the title of this famous 1811 paper be roughly translated into english?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Can the title of this famous 1811 paper be roughly translated into english?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	Can the title of this famous 1811 paper be roughly translated into english?		NULL		data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What happened in french?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What happened in french?		NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What happened in 1833?	Avogadro had been recalled to Turin university	NULL	medium	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What happened in 1833?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a8
Amedeo_Avogadro	What happened in 1833?	blah blah blah	NULL	hard	data/set4/a8
Anders_Celsius	Who determined the dependence of the boiling of water with atmospheric pressure?	Anders Celsius	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What is named after him?	The Celsius crater on the Moon	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	When did he publish a collection?	1733	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Is it true that he published a collection in 1738?	No	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Is it true that thermometer had 100 for the freezing point?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Was Celsius born in Uppsala in Sweden?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Was Anders Celsius (November 27, 1701 April 25, 1744) a Swedish astronomer?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Is The Celsius crater on the Moon named after him?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Who was the first to perform and publish careful experiments aiming at the definition of an international temperature scale on scientific grounds ?	Anders Celsius	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	The Celsius crater on the Moon is what?	named after him	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Is the Celsius crater on the Moon named after him ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Had his thermometer 100 for the freezing point of water and 0 for the boiling point ?	Yes it had	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Was Celsius born in Uppsala in Sweden ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Is the Celsius crater on the Moon named after him ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	Did he not determine the dependence of the boiling of water with atmospheric pressure -LRB- in excellent agreement with modern data -RRB- ?	Yes he did	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What happened from 1730 to 1744?	He was professor of astronomy at Uppsala University	NULL	easy	data/set4/a5
Anders_Celsius	What happened in 1745?	The scale was reversed	NULL	medium	data/set4/a5
beetle	Are beetles insects?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Are beetles insects?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Can beetles be found in polar regions?	No	easy	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	Can beetles be found in polar regions?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Do beetles antennae function primarily as organs of smell?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Do beetles antennae function primarily as organs of smell?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	What are the three sections of a beetle?	the head, the thorax, and the abdomen	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	What are the three sections of a beetle?	The head, the thorax, and the abdomen	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	Which defense mechanism uses colour or shape to deceive potential enemies?	mimicry	medium	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Which defense mechanism uses colour or shape to deceive potential enemies?	Mimicry	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	Which type of beetle is a pest of potato plants?	Colorado potato beetle	medium	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Which type of beetle is a pest of potato plants?	Colorado potato beetle	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	How can beetle larvae be differentiated from other insect larvae?	their hardened, often darkened head, the presence of chewing mouthparts, and spiracles along the sides of the body	hard	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	How can beetle larvae be differentiated from other insect larvae?	By their hardened, often darkened head, the presence of chewing mouthparts, and spiracles along the sides of the body	hard	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	What do beetles eat?	Some are generalists, eating both plants and animals. Other beetles are highly specialised in their diet.	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	What do beetles eat?	They often feed on plants and fungi, break down animal and plant debris, and eat other invertebrates	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	What are the similarities between beetles and grasshoppers?	mouthparts	hard	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	What are the similarities between beetles and grasshoppers?	Beetles have mouthparts similar to those of grasshoppers	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	Are certain species of beetles considered pests?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Are certain species of beetles considered pests?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is a beetle's general anatomy uniform?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is a beetle's general anatomy uniform?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Are beetles endopterygotes?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Are beetles endopterygotes?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	How many species of beetles are there?	350,000	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	How many species of beetles are there?	about 350,000	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	When are sperm cells transferred to the female?	during pairing	medium	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	When are sperm cells transferred to the female?	During pairing	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	What is the study of beetles called?	coleopterology	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	What is the study of beetles called?	coleopterology	medium	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is it possible that there are more than 350,000 species of beetles?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is it possible that there are more than 350,000 species of beetles?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is the Adephaga suborder larger than the Polyphaga suborder?	no	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is the Adephaga suborder larger than the Polyphaga suborder?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	Do carrion beetles eat dung?	no	hard	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	Do carrion beetles eat dung?	no	hard	hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	What are prey of various animals including birds and mammals?	Beetles.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	What was given by Aristotle for the hardened shield like forewings?	The name "Coleoptera".	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Who or what vary greatly in form within the coleoptera?	Antennae.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Are many beetles territorial?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Are beetles endopterygotes with complete metamorphosis?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Oxygen is what?	One kind of gas obtained via a tracheal system.	NULL	too hard	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is there a thriving industry in the collection of beetle specimens for amateur and professional collectors ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Have coleopterists formed organisations to facilitate the study of beetles ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Is the study of beetles called coleopterology , and its practitioners are coleopterists ?	Yes.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a8
beetle	May a single female lay from several dozen to several thousand eggs during her lifetime ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	Can beetles be found in almost all habitats?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a8
beetle	What happened on plants and fungi?	They are food to beetles.	NULL	hard	data/set1/a8
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge the twenty-ninth vice president?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge the twenty-ninth vice president?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge born in Plymouth, Windsor County, Vermont?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge born in Plymouth, Windsor County, Vermont?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Did Coolidge graduate from Black River Academy?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Did Coolidge graduate from Black River Academy?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	When did he drop John from his name?	upon graduating from college	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	When did he drop John from his name?	Upon graduating from college	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	When did Coolidge meet and marry Grace Anna Goodhue?	1905	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	When did Coolidge meet and marry Grace Anna Goodhue?	In 1905	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What period of rapid economic growth did the United States experience during Coolidge's presidency?	the Roaring Twenties	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What period of rapid economic growth did the United States experience during Coolidge's presidency?	the "Roaring Twenties"	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What did Coolidge do after graduating from Amherst?	Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What did Coolidge do after graduating from Amherst?	Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts to take up the practice of law	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Of what state was Coolidge governor?	Massachusetts	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Who appointed Harlan Fiske Stone to the Supreme Court?	Coolidge	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Who appointed Harlan Fiske Stone to the Supreme Court?	Coolidge	hard	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Coolidge the thirteenth President of the United States?	No	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Coolidge the thirteenth President of the United States?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge Republican?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge Republican?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge a governor of Massachusetts?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Calvin Coolidge a governor of Massachusetts?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	When was Coolidge born?	July 4 1872	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	When was Coolidge born?	Plymouth, Windsor County, Vermont	medium	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Where did Coolidge's grandfather had government offices?	Plymouth	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Where did Coolidge's grandfather had government offices?	The town of Plymouth Notch	medium	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Which state were Coolidge born in?	Plymouth, Windsor County, Vermont	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Which state were Coolidge born in?	Vermont	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Is Calvin Jr. older than John Coolidge?	No	hard	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Is Calvin Jr. older than John Coolidge?	No	hard	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Did Coolidge get in Amherst College?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Did Coolidge get in Amherst College?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What caused Calvin Jr.'s death?	heart attack	hard	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What caused Calvin Jr.'s death?	Heart attack	hard	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born in Las Vegas?	No	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born in Las Vegas?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Coolidge opposed in the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Coolidge opposed in the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918?	no	easy	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Did Coolidge meet and marry Grace Anna Goodhue?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Did Coolidge meet and marry Grace Anna Goodhue?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What year did Coolidge open his own law office?	1898	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What year did Coolidge open his own law office?	1898	medium	easy	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What fraternity was Coolidge a member of?	Phi Gamma Delta	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What fraternity was Coolidge a member of?	phi gamma delta	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	In 1905 Coolidge met and married whom?	Grace Anna Goodhue	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	In 1905 Coolidge met and married whom?	Grace Anna Goodhue	medium	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Why did Coolidge not attend law school?	It was too expensive	hard	hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Why did Coolidge not attend law school?	cost	hard	too hard	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Have there been other US presidents that have visited Cuba?	No	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Have there been other US presidents that have visited Cuba?	no	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What years were Coolidge's two sons born in?	1906 and 1908	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What years were Coolidge's two sons born in?	1906 and 1908	hard	medium	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What thrust him into the national spotlight?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What to be born on the fourth of July?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Who was the elder of two children of John Calvin Sr and Victoria Coolidge?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Who or what placed as high as sixth in the voting?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Is it true that he appointed stone to the supreme court?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What do well - received and he have in common?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What did Coolidge address in 1924?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Coolidge more outspoken?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was Coolidge admitted to the bar?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What emigrated from Cambridge?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What graduated from Black?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What Retrieved on May?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	He later what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	They were what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	The Republicans retained what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	(NNP Harding #)(NNP Death )))(PP (IN in )(NP (NP (NN office ))(PP (IN for )(NP (DT a )(JJ full )(NN description )(NNP Vice )(NNP President )(person (NNP Coolidge ))))))))(VP (VP (VBD was )(VP (VBG visiting )(NP (PRP$ his )(NN family )(NN home ))))(, , )(SBAR (WHNP (WDT which ))(S (VP (VBD did )(RB not )(VP (VB have )(NP (NP (NN electricity ))(CC or )(NP (DT a )(NN telephone )))(, , )(PP (IN in )(NP (location (NNP Vermont ))))(SBAR (WHADVP (WRB when ))(S (NP (PRP he ))(VP (VBD received )(NP (NP (NN word ))(PP (IN of )(NP (NP (NNP Harding )(POS 's ))(NN death ))))))))))))))(. . )))	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Was 364 Stone later appointed Chief Justice by President Franklin D. Roosevelt ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Did Coolidge not publish his autobiography in 1929 and write a syndicated newspaper column , `` Calvin Coolidge Says , '' from 1930 -- 1931 ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Were the more well-known Coolidges , such as architect Charles Allerton Coolidge , and diplomat Archibald Cary Coolidge , descended from other branches of the family that had stayed in Massachusetts ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	Is the genius of the average the most convincing proof of $ his strength?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What happened from tuberculosis?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Calvin_Coolidge	What happened from black river academy , vermont?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set3/a9
Canada	Did France cede nearly all of its colonies in Europe in 1763?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Did France cede nearly all of its colonies in Europe in 1763?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Did France cede nearly all of its colonies in Europe in 1763?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada a member of the OECD?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada a member of the OECD?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada a member of the OECD?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada's official language Zulu?	No.	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada's official language Zulu?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada's official language Zulu?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is one significant non-official language?	Chinese.	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is one significant non-official language?	Chinese	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is one significant non-official language?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	In addition to Port Royal, where else did Samuel de Champlain establish a settlement?	Quebec City	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	In addition to Port Royal, where else did Samuel de Champlain establish a settlement?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	What was the Consitution Act formerly called?	The British North America Act.	medium	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	What was the Consitution Act formerly called?	British North America Act	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What was the Consitution Act formerly called?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	Which countries established colonies in Canada?	France and Britain.	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	Which countries established colonies in Canada?	Fance and Britain	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	Which countries established colonies in Canada?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	How has Canada helped UN peacekeeping efforts?	During the Suez Crisis of 1956, Lester B. Pearson eased tensions by proposing the inception of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force. Canada has since served in 50 peacekeeping missions, including every UN peacekeeping effort until 1989	hard	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	How has Canada helped UN peacekeeping efforts?	Canada has played a leading role in UN peacekeeping efforts. During the Suez Crisis of 1956, Lester B. Pearson eased tensions by proposing the inception of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force. Canada has since served in 50 peacekeeping missions, including every UN peacekeeping effort until 1989	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	How has Canada helped UN peacekeeping efforts?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	What percentage of the population don't speak English or French at home?	28%	hard	too hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	What percentage of the population don't speak English or French at home?	1.5%	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	What percentage of the population don't speak English or French at home?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada bilingual?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada bilingual?	Yes, it is.	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Did Canadian soldiers win the Battle of Vimy Ridge in 1917?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Did Canadian soldiers win the Battle of Vimy Ridge in 1917?	No, it did not.	easy	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is an official language of Canada German?	No.	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is an official language of Canada German?	No, it is not.	easy	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	How many provinces and territories does Canada have?	A federation now comprising ten provinces and three territories	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	How many provinces and territories does Canada have?	Ten provinces and three territories	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is Canada's national unemployment rate?	While as of October 2007, Canada's national unemployment rate of 5.9% is its lowest in 33 years. Provincial unemployment rates vary from a low of 3.6% in Alberta to a high of 14.6% in Newfoundland and Labrador. 	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is Canada's national unemployment rate?	In October 2007, Canada's national unemployment rate is 5.9%.	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	Where is the most densely populated part of Canada?	The most densely populated part of the country is the Quebec City-Windsor Corridor along the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence River in the southeast.	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	Where is the most densely populated part of Canada?	The most densely populated part of the country is the Quebec City-Windsor Corridor along the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence River in the southeast.	medium	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is the largest country in the world?	Canada is the second largest country in the world, after Russia, and largest on the continent.	hard	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is the largest country in the world?	Russia.	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is the largest religious group in Canada?	According to 2001 census, 77.1% of Canadians identified as being Christians; of this, Catholics make up the largest group (43.6% of Canadians). The largest Protestant denomination is the United Church of Canada; about 16.5% of Canadians declare no religious affiliation, and the remaining 6.3% were affiliated with religions other than Christianity, of which the largest is Islam numbering 1.9%, followed by Judaism: 1.1%. 	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	What is the largest religious group in Canada?	Christian	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	When did Canada have one of the largest armed forces in the world?	1944.	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	When did Canada have one of the largest armed forces in the world?	World War II.	hard	hard	data/set2/a8
Canada	What have been inhabited for millennia by aboriginal peoples?	The lands	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	European books and maps began referring to this region as Canada in what year?	1545	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	What was Canada's most important industry until the 1800s?	The fur trade	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is it true that it angered many residents of the thirteen colonies?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	How do cuba and declining participation relate?	Canada maintains full relations with both.	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is it true that provinces have a large degree of autonomy?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	What did Canada adopt in 1965?	The Maple Leaf Flag	NULL	medium	data/set2/a8
Canada	What arrived in Britain?	The first Canadian Army units in WW II	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Are Canada 's two official languages English and French ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Are Canada 's official national sports ice hockey ( winter ) and lacrosse ( summer ) ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is Canada a geographically vast and ethnically diverse country ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Did Mainland Nova Scotia not come under British rule with the Treaty of Utrecht    (: ; ?	no!	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Did Cartier not use the word ` Canada ' to refer to not only that village , but the entire area subject to Donnacona , Chief at Stadacona ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Did continental European immigrants not settle the prairies ?	no	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	Is it the world 's second largest country by total area?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
Canada	What happened in 1867?	Canada was formed as a federal, semi-autonomous polity	NULL	easy	data/set2/a8
duck	Are ducks in the Arctic Northern Hemisphere migratory?	Some are	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	Are ducks in the Arctic Northern Hemisphere migratory?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Is a drake a male?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	Is a drake a male?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Do all ducks "quack"?	No	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	Do all ducks "quack"?	no	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	What is the name of a specialized species of duck adapted to catch large fish?	the smew	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What animal attracts the most humor and silliness?	The duck	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What animal attracts the most humor and silliness?	the duck	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What is an economic use of a duck?	Meat	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What is an economic use of a duck?	being farmed for their meat	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	Who is Daffy Duck?	A silly cartoon character	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	Who is Daffy Duck?	a silly cartoon character	hard	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What makes it more difficult for a diving duck to fly?	They are heavier	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What makes it more difficult for a diving duck to fly?	they are heavier	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What are the reasons for hunting wild ducks?	Meat, eggs, and feathers	hard	too hard	data/set1/a10
duck	Do ducks forage underwater?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Do ducks forage underwater?	Diving ducks and sea ducks forage underwater	easy	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	Do all ducks "quack"?	no	easy	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	Do all ducks "quack"?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Is foie gras often made from ducks?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Is foie gras often made from ducks?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	What economic uses to ducks have?	They are farmed for their meat, eggs and feathers. They are also kept and bred by aviculturists and often displayed in zoos.	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What economic uses to ducks have?	They can be farmed for meat, eggs, and feathers	medium	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What kind of ducks feed on land?	Dabbling ducks	medium	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	What kind of ducks feed on land?	Dabbling ducks feed on land	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What unrelated water birds are ducks sometimes confused with?	loons or divers, grebes, gallinules, and coots	medium	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	What unrelated water birds are ducks sometimes confused with?	loons or divers, grebes, gallinules, and coots	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What does the word duck mean?	It is the common name for a number of species in the Anatidae family of birds.	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What does the word duck mean?	to bend down low as if to get under something	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What are some common predators of ducks?	Pike, crocodilians, herons, hawks and eagles.	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What are some common predators of ducks?	pike, crocodilians, and other aquatic hunters	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	How does a Mallard's tongue work?	It's tongue is a flat plate, and on the tongue's back end is a short liftable flap with about 18 short spikes for pushing struggling prey and other food down its throat	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	How does a Mallard's tongue work?	It uses short spikes to push struggling prey and other food down its throat	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	Are diving ducks heavier tha dabbling ducks?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Are diving ducks heavier tha dabbling ducks?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Are adult ducks fast fliers?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Are adult ducks fast fliers?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Are ducks an accepted presence in some populated areas?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	Are ducks an accepted presence in some populated areas?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a10
duck	What types of unrelated water birds with similar forms are ducks sometimes confused with?	loons or divers, grebes, gallinules, and coots	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What types of unrelated water birds with similar forms are ducks sometimes confused with?	loons or divers, grebes, gallinules, and coots	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	Why are ducklings particularly vulnerable?	Their inability to fly.	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	Why are ducklings particularly vulnerable?	their inability to fly makes them easy prey	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What are some economic uses for duck?	Meat,eggs,feathers	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What are some economic uses for duck?	being farmed for their meat, eggs, feathers, (particularly their down)	medium	medium	data/set1/a10
duck	What allows a duck to filter water out of the side of their beaks and keep food inside?	Tiny rows of plates called lamellae	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What allows a duck to filter water out of the side of their beaks and keep food inside?	tiny rows of plates called lamellae like a whale's baleen	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What expression is part of a conceptual framework for testing computer systems?	Quacks like a duck	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	What expression is part of a conceptual framework for testing computer systems?	Quacks like a duck	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	Where did the expression "a sitting duck" come from?	In many areas, wild duckof various species (including ducks farmed and released into the wild) are hunted for food or sport, by shooting, or formerly by decoys.	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
duck	Where did the expression "a sitting duck" come from?	In many areas, wild ducks of various species (including ducks farmed and released into the wild) are hunted for food or sport, by shooting, or formerly by decoys.	hard	hard	data/set1/a10
Egypt	Is Egypt bordered by the Gaza Strip?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Is Egypt bordered by the Gaza Strip?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Is Egypt the most populated country in Africa?	no	easy	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Is Egypt the most populated country in Africa?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does Egypt have political influence in the Middle East?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does Egypt have political influence in the Middle East?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	When was the Six Day War?	1967	medium	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	When was the Six Day War?	1967	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What religions has Egypt outlawed?	All but Christianity, Islam, and Judaism	medium	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What religions has Egypt outlawed?	all religions and belief except Islam, Christianity and Judaism	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What is the poulation of Egypt?	more than 78 million	medium	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What is the poulation of Egypt?	78 million people	medium	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Why does most of Egypt's population live near the Nile?	the only arable agricultural land is found there,	hard	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Why does most of Egypt's population live near the Nile?	The only arable agricultural land is found there	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Are there a large number of Jews living in Egypt today?	no	hard	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Are there a large number of Jews living in Egypt today?	No	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	During what period was Akhenaten a Pharaoh?	The New Kingdom (c.1550&#8722;1070 BC) 	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	During what period was Akhenaten a Pharaoh?	The New Kingdom	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Is Egypt in Asia?	No.	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does Egypt receive the least rainfall in the world?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does Egypt receive the least rainfall in the world?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does Egypt's foreign policy operates along moderate lines?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does Egypt's foreign policy operates along moderate lines?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Since when has Egypt been a republic?	June 18 1953.	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Since when has Egypt been a republic?	June 18 1953	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	When were the Great Sphinx and the Pyramids of Giza built?	During the Old Kingdom.	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	When were the Great Sphinx and the Pyramids of Giza built?	During the Old Kingdom	medium	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What countries border Egypt?	Libya, Sudan, the Gaza Strip and Israel.	medium	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What countries border Egypt?	Libya, Sudan, the Gaza Strip and Israel	medium	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What is the estimated population of Egypt?	More than 78 million.	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	What is the estimated population of Egypt?	78 million	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does snow fall in Egypt?	Yes.	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	Does snow fall in Egypt?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a6
Egypt	When did organized agriculture appear in the Nile Valley?	6000 BC.	hard	medium	data/set2/a6
Egypt	When did organized agriculture appear in the Nile Valley?	About 6000 BC	hard	medium	data/set2/a6
elephant	Are elephants the largest land animals alive today?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Are elephants the largest land animals alive today?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Can an elephant kill a rhinoceros?	yes	easy	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	Can an elephant kill a rhinoceros?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Are elephants good swimmers?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Are elephants good swimmers?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	How many living species of African Elephants are there?	2	medium	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	How many living species of African Elephants are there?	The African Elephant genus contains two (or, arguably, three) living species.	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How long may elephants live?	70 years	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How long may elephants live?	As long as 70 years, sometimes longer.	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	Why does the phrase 'elephants never forget' have no metaphorical meaning?	it refers literally to elephants supposedly having an excellent memory	medium	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	Why does the phrase 'elephants never forget' have no metaphorical meaning?	Because it refers literally to elephants supposedly having an excellent memory.	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How many living species of Asian Elephants are there?	1	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	How many living species of Asian Elephants are there?	one	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How much do elephants weight at birth?	120 kilograms	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How much do elephants weight at birth?	At birth it is common for an elephant calf to weigh 120 kilograms (265 lb).	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	What did Aristotle say about elephants?	the beast which passeth all others in wit and mind	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	What did Aristotle say about elephants?	Aristotle once said the elephant was "the beast which passeth all others in wit and mind."	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	Are elephant populations in West Africa generally small and fragmented?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Are elephant populations in West Africa generally small and fragmented?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Is the Asian elephant larger than the African?	no	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Is the Asian elephant larger than the African?	Sometimes	easy	too hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	Is an elephant's skin tough?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Is an elephant's skin tough?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	How do elephants communicate over long distances?	by producing and receiving low frequency sound	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How do elephants communicate over long distances?	By producing and receiving low-frequency sound (infrasound)	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	When do African elephants lie down?	when they are sick or wounded	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How long is the elephant's gestation period?	22 months	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How long is the elephant's gestation period?	22 months	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	How many species of African elephants have been proposed?	three	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	How many species of African elephants have been proposed?	three	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	What are the elephant's ears important for?	temperature regulation	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	What are the elephant's ears important for?	temperature regulation	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	What land animal has the largest brain?	elephant	hard	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	What land animal has the largest brain?	The elephant	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	Are elephants mammals?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Are elephants mammals?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Have elephants been used as working animals?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Have elephants been used as working animals?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Do they prefer forested areas?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	Do they prefer forested areas?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	What is the world population of Asian elephants?	60000	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	What is the world population of Asian elephants?	The world population of Asian elephants – also called Indian Elephants or Elephas maximus – is estimated to be around 60,000	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	What part of an elephant is very important for temperature regulation?	Ears	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	What part of an elephant is very important for temperature regulation?	The large flapping ears of an elephant are also very important for temperature regulation.	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	Where was the largest elephant ever recorded shot?	Angola	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	Where was the largest elephant ever recorded shot?	The largest elephant ever recorded was shot in Angola in 1956.	medium	medium	data/set1/a5
elephant	Is an Asian elephant smaller than an African elephant?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	Is an Asian elephant smaller than an African elephant?	Yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a5
elephant	What land animal is larger than an elephant?	None	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	What land animal is larger than an elephant?	None, the elephant is the largest land animal.	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	Has tusklessness become a rare abnormality?	No	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
elephant	Has tusklessness become a rare abnormality?	No, tusklessness has become a widespread hereditary trait. 	hard	hard	data/set1/a5
Finland	Were the treaties signed in 1947 and 1948 with the Ukraine?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Were the treaties signed in 1947 and 1948 with the Ukraine?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is Finnish a member of the Baltic-Finnic subgroup of the Uralic languages?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is Finnish a member of the Baltic-Finnic subgroup of the Uralic languages?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is the most read newspaper in Finland Taloussanomat?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is the most read newspaper in Finland Taloussanomat?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Which Russian army general conquered Finland in 1809?	Alexander I	medium	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Which Russian army general conquered Finland in 1809?	Alexander I	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the life expectancy for men in Finland?	75 years	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the life expectancy for men in Finland?	75 years	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	In what year were the "Games of the XV Olympiad" held?	1952	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	In what year were the "Games of the XV Olympiad" held?	1952	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What body of water lies to the south of Finland?	the Gulf of Finland	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	What body of water lies to the south of Finland?	Archipelago Sea	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Name an animal that is growing in number due to recent conservation efforts	Golden Eagle, Brown Bear, or Eurasian Lynx (Change imperative to interrogative)	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Name an animal that is growing in number due to recent conservation efforts	Golden Eagle	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Today, are there more cell phone subscriptions than people in Finland?	yes	hard	too hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Today, are there more cell phone subscriptions than people in Finland?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is Matti Vanhanen the Prime Minister of Finland?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is Matti Vanhanen the Prime Minister of Finland?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is the capital city Oslo?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is the capital city Oslo?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Does it have a border with Norway?	yes	easy	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	Does it have a border with Norway?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the life expectancy for men?	75 years	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the life expectancy for men?	75 years	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the biggest city in Finland?	Greater Helsinki	medium	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the biggest city in Finland?	the cities of the Greater Helsinki metropolitan area	medium	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Who is the most popular rock group in Finland?	CMX	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	Who is the most popular rock group in Finland?	CMX	medium	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is Finland's economy like?	a highly industrialised, free-market economy	hard	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	Where is Finland located?	Northern Europe	hard	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	Where is Finland located?	Northern Europe	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the weather like in summer?	relatively warm	hard	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the weather like in summer?	relatively warm	hard	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	Does salmon remain the favorite of fly rod enthusiasts?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Does salmon remain the favorite of fly rod enthusiasts?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Are there cathedrals scattered all across Finland?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	Are there cathedrals scattered all across Finland?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	According to Reader's Digest, is Finland best for living?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	According to Reader's Digest, is Finland best for living?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a4
Finland	When did the first verifiable written documents appear?	Twelfth Century	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	When did the first verifiable written documents appear?	 The first verifiable written documents appeared in the twelfth century. 	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the capital city?	Helsinki	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the capital city?	The capital city is Helsinki. 	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the most extensively celebrated holiday?	Christmas	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is the most extensively celebrated holiday?	Christmas is the most extensively celebrated holiday.	medium	medium	data/set2/a4
Finland	Does a large proportion of the population speak Swedish as its mother tongue?	No	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Do women live longer than men?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	Do women live longer than men?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is a country with which Finland is involved in an international conflict?	None	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is a country with which Finland is involved in an international conflict?	Finland is not involved in international conflicts or border disputes. 	hard	hard	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is Helsinki?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is concentrated in the southern part of the country?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	What is spoken natively by a 5.5 percent minority?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	What do jari litmanen and sami hyypiä have in common?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is it true that he composed finlandia in 1899?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is it true that it has borders with sweden?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	What did Finland join in 1995?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is finnish culture indigenous?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is finnish architecture famous?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	What situated in Northern?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	What arrived in Finland?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	What ceded by Finland?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Lunch is what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Who is the autonomous Åland Islands , where Finnish is not compulsory due to Swedish being the sole official language of the province . ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	The earliest people were what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Are Various sporting events popular in Finland ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Are all official holidays in Finland established by acts of Parliament ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Are the people of Finland accustomed to technology and information services ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Was one of the most productive composers of popular music Toivo Kärki , and the most famous singer Olavi Virta -LRB- 1915 -- 1972 -RRB- ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Do 79 percent of the population not use the Internet ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Did the relationship between the Grand Duchy and the Russian Empire not sour when the Russian government made moves to restrict Finnish autonomy ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is finland , officially the republic of finland (`` `` republic of finland ('' '' , or (`` `` suomen tasavalta ('' '' in finnish and (`` `` republiken finland ('' '' in swedish , the long protocol name , which is not defined by the law?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is the capital city helsinki?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Finland	Is finland a democratic , parliamentary republic?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a4
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford a member of the House of Representatives?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford a member of the House of Representatives?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	For how long was Ford a member of the House of Representatives?	Over eight years.	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	For how long was Ford a member of the House of Representatives?	Ford served for over eight years as the Republican Minority Leader of the United States House of Representatives	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Gerald Ford a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Gerald Ford a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did ford get an award called "Congressman's congressman"?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did ford get an award called "Congressman's congressman"?	No	easy	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did ford attend the University of Michigan?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did ford attend the University of Michigan?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	What positions Ford played in the school football team?	Center and linebacker	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	What positions Ford played in the school football team?	Captain	medium	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	What did Ford say about his biological father?	He was abusive and had a history of hitting his mother.	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	What did Ford say about his biological father?	his biological father was abusive and had a history of hitting his mother	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Who did Ford nominate for Vice President?	Bob Dole	medium	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Who did Ford nominate for Vice President?	Nelson Rockefeller	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford active about Vietnamese affairs?	No
\n	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford active about Vietnamese affairs?	Yes	hard	too hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Had Ford's wife married before?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Had Ford's wife married before?	No	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Is Ford related with the assassination of John F. Kennedy?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Gerald Ford the 38th President of the United States?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Gerald Ford the 38th President of the United States?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did Gerald Ford serve as the Republican Minority Leader of the House of Representatives?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did Gerald Ford serve as the Republican Minority Leader of the House of Representatives?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford an Eagle Scout?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford an Eagle Scout?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	What district was Ford elected from?	Michigan's 5th congressional district	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	What district was Ford elected from?	Michigan's 5th congressional district	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	How many Eagle Scouts were involved in Ford's funeral procession?	400	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	How many Eagle Scouts were involved in Ford's funeral procession?	About 400	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Which future Heisman Trophy winner did Ford tackle?	Jay Berwanger	medium	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Which future Heisman Trophy winner did Ford tackle?	Jay Berwanger	medium	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Has another US President been an Eagle Scout?	no	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Has another US President been an Eagle Scout?	no	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did Ford need to do extra work to pay for college?	yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did Ford need to do extra work to pay for college?	yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Have more than five Presidents lived past the age of 90?	no	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Have more than five Presidents lived past the age of 90?	no	hard	hard	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	How do kwajalein and eniwetok relate?	The Monterey supported landings at both locations.	NULL	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	What did Ford receive on April 13, 1942?	Ford received a commission as ensign in the US Naval Reserve.	NULL	medium	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford released from the hospital?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford interred at his Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Is Ford one of only four former Presidents to live to 90 or more years of age ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Was Ford the last surviving member of the Warren Commission ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did Grand Rapids supporters not urge him to take on Bartel J. Jonkman , the incumbent Republican congressman ?	No.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a10
Gerald_Ford	Did they not claim Ford 's pardon was quid pro quo in exchange for Nixon 's resignation ?	They did claim Ford's pardon was quid pro quo.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a10
Ghana	Does Ghana have twice the per capita output of the poorer countries in West Africa?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Does Ghana have twice the per capita output of the poorer countries in West Africa?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is English Ghana's official language?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is English Ghana's official language?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Did the Dutch build the Elmina Castle?	No	easy	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Did the Dutch build the Elmina Castle?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	When did Ghana achieve independence from the United Kingdom?	1957	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	When did Ghana achieve independence from the United Kingdom?	1957	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	How many regions is Ghana divided into?	10	medium	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	How many regions is Ghana divided into?	10	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Who is the head of state of Ghana?	President John Agyekum Kofuor	medium	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Who is the head of state of Ghana?	John Agyekum Kufuor	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What is the dominant religion in Ghana?	Christian	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What is the dominant religion in Ghana?	christian	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What are the two subfamilies of the Native Ghanaian languages?	Kwa and Gur	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What are the two subfamilies of the Native Ghanaian languages?	Kwa and Gur	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What is the weather like at Lake Volta?	Warm and comparatively dry	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What is the weather like at Lake Volta?	warm and comparatively dry	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is Ghana in Asia?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is Ghana in Asia?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is English the official language?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is English the official language?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is Ghana's head of state John Agyekum Kufuor?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is Ghana's head of state John Agyekum Kufuor?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What does the word Ghana mean?	warrior king	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What does the word Ghana mean?	Warrior King	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Who was Kwame Nkrumah?	founder and first president	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Who was Kwame Nkrumah?	founder and first president of the modern Ghanaian state	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Where is old Ghana in relation to present Ghana?	500 miles north	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Where is old Ghana in relation to present Ghana?	500 miles north of the present Ghana, and occupied the area between Rivers Senegal and Niger	medium	medium	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Who makes up Ghana's Parliament?	the New Patriotic Party and National Democratic Congress	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Who makes up Ghana's Parliament?	the New Patriotic Party and National Democratic Congress	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What European countries established states in Ghana?	The UK	hard	too hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What European countries established states in Ghana?	Portugual, France, Britain, Netherlands	hard	hard	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What was Wagadugu?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What was controlled by Sundiata in 1240 AD, and absorbed into the larger Mali Empire?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What connected the Akans to this Empire?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is it true that anecdotal evidence connected the akans to this empire?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is it true that the portuguese came to ghana in the 15th century?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is it true that agricultural expansion marked the period before 500?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What did Ghana capture in 1642?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is The Parliament of Ghana unicameral?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is Medieval Ghana (4th- 13th Century): The Republic of Ghana is named after the medieval Ghana Empire of West Africa. named after the medieval Ghana Empire of West Africa?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What was on March?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	The coastline is what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Ghana 's spending on education has what?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Who sits at Osu Castle ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is all teaching done in English , Ghana 's official language ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Are Native Ghanaian languages divided into two linguistic subfamilies of the Niger-Congo language family ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Are more than 100 languages and dialects spoken in Ghana ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Had the tax regime which started in 1998 a single rate but since September 2007 entered into a multiple rate regime ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Did European and other : 0.2 % Religions : Christian 63 % , African beliefs 21 % , Muslim 16 % , Facts on People of Ghana , not access July 13 , 2006 More than 100 languages and dialects are spoken in Ghana ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Does this not allow retailers of taxable goods under Act 546 to charge a marginal 3 % on their sales and account on same to the VAT Service ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is the republic of ghana a country in west africa?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	What happened with the portuguese in the 15th century?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Ghana	Is the old ghana 500 miles?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a5
Gray_Wolf	Does the Gray Wolf share an ancestry with the domestic dog?	Yes	easy	too easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Does the Gray Wolf share an ancestry with the domestic dog?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Do wolf pups tend to have darker fur than adults?	Yes	easy	too easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Do wolf pups tend to have darker fur than adults?	Yes, They do tend to have darker furs	easy	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Do wolves leave their pack?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Do wolves leave their pack?	They leave their birth pack when they reach sexual maturity	easy	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	What kinds of coats do wolves have?	bulky coats with two layers	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	What kinds of coats do wolves have?	Tough guard hairs that repel water and dirt, and a dense, water-resistant layer	medium	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Where do wolves have scent glands?	Helping the woldf to effectively navigate over large expanses while concurrently keeping others informed of its whereabouts.	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Where do wolves have scent glands?	between a wolf's toes	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	How much do wolves weigh?	typically varies between 32 and 62 kilograms	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	How much do wolves weigh?	between 32 and 68 kilograms 	medium	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Why do wolves howl?	Howling helps pack members keep in touch, allowing them to communicate effectively in thickly forested areas or over great distances. Howling also helps to call pack members to a specific location. Howling can also serve as a declaration of territory, as shown in a dominant wolf&apos;s tendency to respond to a human imitation of a "rival" wolf in an area the wolf considers its own. 	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Why do wolves howl?	To pack members keep in touch, allowing them to communicate effectively in thickly forested areas or over great distances	hard	too hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	What is surplus killing?	Surplus killing is defined as the killing of several prey animals too numerous to eat at one sitting.	hard	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	What is surplus killing?	the killing of several prey animals too numerous to eat at one sitting	hard	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Are Gray Wolves native to North America?	Yes	hard	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Are Gray Wolves native to North America?	No. Current theory suggests that it's from Eurasia	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Is the Gray Wolf a mammal?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Is the Gray Wolf a mammal?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Are a wolf's teeth its main weapons?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Are a wolf's teeth its main weapons?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Are wolves built for stamina?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Are wolves built for stamina?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Where is the largest gray wolf population thought to be found?	Kazakhstan	medium	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Where is the largest gray wolf population thought to be found?	Kazakhstan	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	To what genus does the gray wolf belong?	Canis	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	To what genus does the gray wolf belong?	Canis	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	When do wolves molt?	Late Spring or Early Summer	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	When do wolves molt?	late spring or early summer	medium	medium	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Why is it beneficial for alpha males and females to forcefully prevent other wolves from mating?	A pack can only suppport one littler per year	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Why is it beneficial for alpha males and females to forcefully prevent other wolves from mating?	The pack tension rises as each mature wolf feels urged to mate	hard	too hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	What type of tools do biologists use to capture wolves for tagging?	Darting and Foot hold traps.	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	What type of tools do biologists use to capture wolves for tagging?	Darting and foot hold traps	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Forward, erect ears and slightly bristle hackles are a sign of what in wolves?	Dominance	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Gray_Wolf	Forward, erect ears and slightly bristle hackles are a sign of what in wolves?	Dominance	hard	hard	data/set1/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Grover Cleveland born in New York?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Grover Cleveland born in New York?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Did Grover Cleveland win the 1884 election?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Did Grover Cleveland win the 1884 election?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Did Grover Cleveland support women's suffrage?	No	easy	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Did Grover Cleveland support women's suffrage?	no	easy	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Where was Grover Cleveland married?	In the White House	medium	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Where was Grover Cleveland married?	in the Blue Room in the White House	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	What did Cleveland die from?	A heart attack	medium	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	What did Cleveland die from?	a heart attack	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	How many years after Cleveland left office did the U.S. win the Spanish-American War?	One Year	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	How many years after Cleveland left office did the U.S. win the Spanish-American War?	one	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	What did Cleveland's opponents say in 1884 to counter his innocent image?	That he had fathered an illegitimate child	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	What did Cleveland's opponents say in 1884 to counter his innocent image?	that he had fathered an illegitimate child while he was a lawyer in Buffalo	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Who did Cleveland run against in 1884?	former Senator James G. Blaine of Maine	hard	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Who did Cleveland run against in 1884?	James G. Blaine	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Why did Cleveland want to hide his cancer surgery from the public?	To avoid further market panic	hard	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Why did Cleveland want to hide his cancer surgery from the public?	because of the financial depression of the country	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Grover Cleveland the twenty-seventh president of the United States?	No.	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Grover Cleveland the twenty-seventh president of the United States?	No.	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Is Grover Cleveland honest?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Is Grover Cleveland honest?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Grover Cleveland married in the whitehouse?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Grover Cleveland married in the whitehouse?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	When was he elected sheriff of Erire County, New York?	Yes.	medium	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	When was he elected sheriff of Erire County, New York?	1870	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	When did he die?	June 24 1908	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	When did he die?	1908 	medium	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Which election did Grover Cleveland win?	1884 and 1892 presidential elections	medium	hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Who were Grover Cleveland's parents?	Cleveland was born in Caldwell, New Jersey to the Reverend Richard Cleveland and Anne Neal.	hard	too hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Who were Grover Cleveland's parents?	Reverend Richard Cleveland and Anne Neal.	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	How many children did Grover Cleveland have?	5	hard	hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	How many children did Grover Cleveland have?	Six.	hard	too hard	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Who lost control of his party to the agrarians and silverites in 1896?	Grover Cleveland	NULL	medium	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Is it true that he sent in federal troops to chicago?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Cleveland born in Caldwell, New Jersey to the Reverend Richard Cleveland and Anne Neal?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Grover Cleveland elected Sheriff of Erie County, New York?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Was Cleveland 's portrait on the U.S. $ 1000 bill from 1928 to 1946 ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Is he buried in the Princeton Cemetery of the Nassau Presbyterian Church ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Did the Department of the Interior not charge that the rights of way for this land must be returned to the public because the railroads failed to extend their lines according to agreements ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Grover_Cleveland	Did the team , sedating Cleveland with nitrous oxide -LRB- laughing gas -RRB- , not remove his upper left jaw and portions of his hard palate ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a6
Henri_Becquerel	He became chief engineer in the Department of Bridges and Highways in what year?	in 1894	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	What led Becquerel to investigate the spontaneous emission of nuclear radiation?	phographic plates being fully exposed	NULL	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Is it true that he married louise désirée lorieux in 1890?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Is it true that he shared the nobel prize in physics?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	When did he marry louise désirée lorieux?	1890	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Becquerel elected Permanent Secretary of the Académie des Sciences?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Was Becquerel born in Paris into a family which, including he and his son Jean, produced four generations of scientists?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Who won the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics for discovering radioactivity ?	Henri Becquerel	NULL	medium	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Did he not die at the age of 55 in Le Croisic ?	Yes he died at the age of 55	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Did one places between the phosphorescent substance and the paper a piece of money or a metal screen not pierce with a cut-out design ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	What happened in 1896?	 Becquerel accidentally discovered radioactivity.	NULL	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	What happened with a bromide emulsion in two sheets of very thick black paper?	the plate does not become clouded upon being exposed to the sun for a day	NULL	hard	data/set4/a9
Henri_Becquerel	Is there a becquerel crater on the moon and a becquerel crater on mars?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set4/a9
Indonesia	Are the Javanese the largest and politically dominant ethnic group in Indonesia?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Are the Javanese the largest and politically dominant ethnic group in Indonesia?	Yes	easy	too easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is Indonesia a monarchy with a presidential system?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is Indonesia a monarchy with a presidential system?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Did the Japanese invasion and subsequent occupation during WWII end Dutch rule?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Did the Japanese invasion and subsequent occupation during WWII end Dutch rule?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	In what year did East Timor secede from Indonesia?	1999	medium	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	In what year did East Timor secede from Indonesia?	1999	medium	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	When did Islam become the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra?	the end of the 16th century	medium	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	When did Islam become the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra?	by the end of the 16th century	medium	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Does Indonesia have the world's hightest level of biodiversity?	no	medium	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Does Indonesia have the world's hightest level of biodiversity?	No	medium	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Was Indonesia named after it became an independent country?	no	hard	hard	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Was Indonesia named after it became an independent country?	No	hard	hard	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Why did Indonesia break off relations with the People's Republic of China?	because of anti-communist purges early in the Suharto era	hard	too hard	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Why did Indonesia break off relations with the People's Republic of China?	anti-communist purges early in the Suharto era	hard	hard	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Which spice originally attracted Europeans to Indonesia?	nutmeg, cloves, or cubeb pepper	hard	hard	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Which spice originally attracted Europeans to Indonesia?	nutmeg, cloves, and cubeb pepper	hard	hard	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	What is Jakarta?	Indonesia's special capital region	NULL	hard	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	What shares land borders with Papua New Guinea, East Timor and Malaysia?	Indonesia	NULL	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	What are the largest and politically dominant ethnic group?	the Javanese	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	What happens when the srivijaya kingdom formed trade links?	The indonesian archipelago became an important trade region	NULL	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is it true that indonesia has vast areas of wilderness?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is Indonesia a republic?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Are Sports in Indonesia generally male-orientated?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is Indonesia the world's largest archipelagic state?	yes	NULL	medium	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Are sports in Indonesia generally male-orientated and spectator sports are often associated with illegal gambling ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is Pencak Silat an Indonesian martial art ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Has Indonesia the world 's largest Muslim population ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Who has its own political legislature and governor ?	each province	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is it the world 's largest archipelagic state?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is it the world 's fourth most populous country and the most populous muslim-majority nation?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Indonesia	Is indonesia a republic?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a10
Isaac_Newton	What Eves?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What are a rumors that he remained a virgin?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Who was, by later reports of his contemporaries, thoroughly unhappy with the work?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Is it true that newton saw god as the master creator?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Is it true that he acquired a circle of admirers?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Is it true that this contained the beginnings of the laws of motion?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What did Isaac Newton place at 3 April, AD 33, which agrees with one traditionally accepted date?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Was Newton outraged?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Was Newton born three months after the death of his father?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What died in London?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What was against William?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What quartered on March?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	NOTTTT  FOUND	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Were the two in a dispute over optical discoveries at the time ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Are Various trees claimed to be " the " apple tree which Newton describes ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Was Newton outraged , and went about the work to uncover anything about Chaloner ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Was this study cast into doubt when it was later found that Newton himself wrote the study 's concluding remarks on Leibniz ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Did Newton not entertain `` a passion '' for Storer while he lodged at the Clarke house ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	Does # Newton not  Third Law states that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction ?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What happened at the time of newton 's birth?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What happened from school?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
Isaac_Newton	What happened on those of aristotle?	NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set4/a1
James_Monroe	Is James Monrow the fifth president of US?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Is James Monrow the fifth president of US?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is the first word on the page?	James	easy	too easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is the first word on the page?	James_Monroe	easy	too hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is the first number on the page?	28	easy	too easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is the first number on the page?	28	easy	too hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did Monroe's presidency expired?	March 4, 1825	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did Monroe's presidency expired?	March 4, 1825.	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is Monroe's father's name?	Spence	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is Monroe's father's name?	Spence Monroe.	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is Monroe's daughter's name?	Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is Monroe's daughter's name?	Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What does "Era of Good Feelings" refers to?	Reduced tension	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What does "Era of Good Feelings" refers to?	Monroe allowed his political base to decay, which reduced tensions and led to the naming of his era as the "Era of Good Feelings".	hard	too hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Did Monroe' wedding happen at the Trinity Church in New York?	Yes	hard	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Did Monroe' wedding happen at the Trinity Church in New York?	Yes	hard	too hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is Monroe Doctrine?	A doctrine declaring U.S. opposition to European interference in the Americas.	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What is Monroe Doctrine?	In it, Monroe proclaimed the Americas should be free from future European colonization and free from European interference in sovereign countries' affairs. It further stated the United States' intention to stay neutral in European wars and wars between European powers and their colonies, but to consider any new colonies or interference with independent countries in the Americas as hostile acts toward the United States. 	hard	hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Was James Monroe President of the United States?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Was James Monroe President of the United States?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Did James Monroe attend the College of William and Mary?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Did James Monroe attend the College of William and Mary?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Did James Monroe fight in the Continental Army?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Did James Monroe fight in the Continental Army?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Where was James Monroe born?	Westmoreland County, Virginia	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Where was James Monroe born?	Westmoreland County, Virginia	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Where was James Monroe shot?	at the Battle of Trenton, in his left shoulder	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Where was James Monroe shot?	The Battle of Trenton	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who did James Monroe marry?	Elizabeth Kortright	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who did James Monroe marry?	Elizabeth Kortright	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What did James Monroe do before being elected governor?	He practiced law in Virginia.	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What did James Monroe do before being elected governor?	He practiced law	hard	hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	In which years were John Monroe elected as President?	1817-1825	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	In which years were John Monroe elected as President?	1817-1825	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who was John Monroe standing behind in the painting of  Washington Crossing the Delaware?	George Washington	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who was John Monroe standing behind in the painting of  Washington Crossing the Delaware?	George Washington	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When was James Monroe appointed to Secretary of War?	1814	easy	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When was James Monroe appointed to Secretary of War?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did James Monroe die?	July 4, 1831	easy	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did James Monroe die?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did James Monroe graduate from William and Mary?	1776	easy	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did James Monroe graduate from William and Mary?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When was James Monroe elected president?	Monroe was elected president in the election of 1816, and re-elected in 1820.	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When was James Monroe elected president?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Which property did James Monroe sell in 1817?	Monroe Hill on the grounds of the University of Virginia.	medium	hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Which property did James Monroe sell in 1817?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did James Monroe introduce the Monroe Doctrine?	December 2, 1823	medium	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	When did James Monroe introduce the Monroe Doctrine?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who did James Monroe live with in New York City?	His daughter Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur	hard	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who did James Monroe live with in New York City?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What did James Monroe's letters not contain?	No letters survive in which he might have discussed his religious beliefs.	hard	hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What did James Monroe's letters not contain?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What was the result of the rejection of the Jay Treaty?	As a result, the two nations moved closer toward the War of 1812. 	hard	hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What was the result of the rejection of the Jay Treaty?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who is depicted holding the flag in the famous painting of Washington Crossing the Delaware?	Monroe	NULL	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What dwindled and eventually died out, starting with the Hartford Convention?	The Federalist Party	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Is it true that he practiced law in fredericksburg?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What did James Monroe make in 1817?	two long tours	NULL	hard	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Was Monroe anticlerical?	no	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Was Monroe appointed Minister to France from 1794 to 1796?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What expired on March?	Monroe's presidency	NULL	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Had Monroe racked up many debts during his years of public life ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Who dismantled partisan and sectional coalitions ?	many congressmen	NULL	medium	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	Had Monroe racked up many debts during his years of public life ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What happened in 1811?	Monroe returned to the Virginia House of Delegates and was elected to another term as governor of Virginia	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Monroe	What happened in the election of 1816?	Monroe was elected president	NULL	easy	data/set3/a2
James_Watt	Who died in childbirth in 1772?	Margaret Miller	NULL	medium	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	Who died in 1832?	Margaret Miller.	NULL	medium	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	Is watt commemorated by statuary in George Square, Glasgow and Princes Street, Edinburgh?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	Was watt a gentleman, greatly respected by other prominent men of the Industrial Revolution?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	Was watt a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and the Royal Society of London?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	Four years after opening his shop , Watt began what?	Watt began to experiment with steam after his friend, Professor John Robison, called his attention to it.	NULL	medium	data/set4/a2
James_Watt	Was Watt ranked 22nd in Michael H. Hart 's list of the most influential figures in history ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a2
John_Adams	Did John Adams represent the Continental Congress in Europe?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did John Adams represent the Continental Congress in Europe?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Was Adams raised Congregationalist?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Was Adams raised Congregationalist?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Was Adams an opponent of the Stamp Act?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Was Adams an opponent of the Stamp Act?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	When did Adams graduate from college?	1755.	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	When did Adams graduate from college?	1755	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Who was on the committee with Adams to draft  a Declaration of Independence?	Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston and Roger Sherman.	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Who was on the committee with Adams to draft  a Declaration of Independence?	Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston and Roger Sherman	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What did Jefferson call John Adams?	The "Colossus of Independence".	medium	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What did Jefferson call John Adams?	Colossus of Independence	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What was Adams' political party?	The Federalist Party.	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What was Adams' political party?	Federalist	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Was Adams the first to introduce a bicameral legislature?	Yes.	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Was Adams the first to introduce a bicameral legislature?	yes	hard	too hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did John Adams get along with Alexander Hamilton?	No.	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did John Adams get along with Alexander Hamilton?	no	hard	too hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did John Adams go to Harvard? 	yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did John Adams go to Harvard? 	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did John Adams support the Stamp Act of 1765?	No	easy	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did John Adams support the Stamp Act of 1765?	No	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Is Adams' birthplace part of a national park?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Is Adams' birthplace part of a national park?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	When did John Adams serve as Vice President?	1789-1797	medium	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	When did John Adams serve as Vice President?	1789-1797	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	With what party did Adams run for presidency?	The Federalist Party	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	With what party did Adams run for presidency?	The Federalist Party	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Where is Adams buried?	United First Parish Church	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Where is Adams buried?	United First Parish Church	medium	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Who were the midnight judges?	They were a series of judges, so called because most of them were formally appointed days before Adams' presidential term expired	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Who were the midnight judges?	They were judges formally appointed days before Adams term expired	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	In what ways was Adams opposed by Anderw Hamilton?	Hamilton wanted to control the army differently than Adams	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What information did he record in his diary?	Descriptions of events and ompressions of men	hard	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What information did he record in his diary?	He wrote descriptions of events and impressions of men	hard	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Who was defeated for re-election in the`` Revolution of 1800'' by Thomas Jefferson?	John Adams	NULL	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Who represented the Continental Congress in Europe?	John Adams	NULL	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What is now part of Adams National Historical Park?	John Adams' birthplace	NULL	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Is it true that adams had spent some time as the ambassador?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Is it true that massachusetts sent him in 1774?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Who did Massachusetts send in 1774?	John Adams	NULL	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Are his last words often quoted as " Thomas Jefferson survives " . ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	The John Adams Library , housed at the Boston Public Library , contains what?	Adams's personal collection of more than 3,500 volumes	NULL	medium	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Adams ' opponents were what?	Democratic Republicans	NULL	hard	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	Did the election of 1800 not become a bitter and volatile battle , with each side expressing extraordinary fear of the other party and its policies ?	No.	NULL	easy	data/set3/a1
John_Adams	What happened in 1764?	Adams married Abigail Smith	NULL	medium	data/set3/a1
kangaroo	Is a kangaroo a reptile?	no	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is a kangaroo a reptile?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is a kangaroo on the Australian coat of arms?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is a kangaroo on the Australian coat of arms?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Was James Cook the first to record the name "Kangooroo?"	yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Was James Cook the first to record the name "Kangooroo?"	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is a collective noun for kangaroos?	mob, troop, or court	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is a collective noun for kangaroos?	Mob, troop, or court	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Where do joeys complete postnatal development?	marsupium	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Where do joeys complete postnatal development?	A pouch called a marsupium	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What do kangaroos use for "crawl-walking?"	its hind feet	hard	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What do kangaroos use for "crawl-walking?"	Their hind feet and their tails	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Why do kangaroos have a wide bite?	The two sides of the lower jaw are not joined together and the lower incisors are farther apart.	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Why do kangaroos have a wide bite?	Because of grazing	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is responsible for converting the hydrogen byproduct of fermentation into acetate?	bacteria	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is responsible for converting the hydrogen byproduct of fermentation into acetate?	The digestive system of a kangaroo	hard	too hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Are wild kangaroos shot for meat?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Are wild kangaroos shot for meat?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Have kangaroos fared well since European settlement?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Have kangaroos fared well since European settlement?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Do kangaroos have many natural predators?	no	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Do kangaroos have many natural predators?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is the average life expectancy of a kangaroo?	4.6 years	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is the average life expectancy of a kangaroo?	about 4.6 years	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	When did the first official report of kangaroo blindness take place?	1994	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	When did the first official report of kangaroo blindness take place?	1994	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What are vehicles that frequent isolated roads often fitted with?	roo bars	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What are vehicles that frequent isolated roads often fitted with?	"roo bars"	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Do kangaroos eat plants?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Do kangaroos eat plants?	Yes	hard	too hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What are some extinct predators of the kangaroo?	Thylacine, Marsupial Lion, Maagalania, and Wonambi	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What are some extinct predators of the kangaroo?	The Thylacine	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is a Kangaroo a Marsupial?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is a Kangaroo a Marsupial?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is the kangaroo an herbivour?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is the kangaroo an herbivour?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Are Kangaroos Shy?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Are Kangaroos Shy?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What method of locomotion do Kangaroos Use?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What method of locomotion do Kangaroos Use?	hopping	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is the average life expectancy of a kangaroo?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is the average life expectancy of a kangaroo?	4 to 6 years	medium	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is a collective noun for a kangaroo?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is a collective noun for a kangaroo?	a mob, troop, or court	medium	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is a roo?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is a roo?	a kangaroo	hard	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is used to protect a vehicale from a Kangaroo?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What is used to protect a vehicale from a Kangaroo?	roo bars	hard	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What method is used by Kangaroos to travel?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What method is used by Kangaroos to travel?	hopping	hard	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Who asked a nearby local what the creatures were called?	Captain James Cook and naturalist Sir Joseph Banks	NULL	hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What are four species that are commonly referred to as kangaroos?	The Red Kangaroo, The Eastern Grey Kangaroo, The Western Grey Kangaroo, and The Antilopine Kangaroo	NULL	too hard	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Are kangaroos and wallabies adept swimmers?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Are kangaroos farmed to any extent?	No.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Who also discovered that less than three percent of kangaroos exposed to the virus developed blindness ?	Veterinarians	NULL	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Different species of kangaroos eat what?	different diets	NULL	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Have Kangaroos dazzled by headlights or startled by engine noise been known to leap in front of cars ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is a collision with a vehicle capable of killing a kangaroo ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Was the game of Marn grook played using a ball made from kangaroo by the Kurnai people ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Have kangaroos large , powerful hind legs , large feet adapted for leaping , a long muscular tail for balance , and a small head ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Is a kangaroo a marsupial from the family macropodidae -LRB- macropods , meaning (`` ` large foot ('' ' -RRB-?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	What kinds of changes have larger kangaroos adapted much better to?	Changes wrought to the Australian landscape by humans.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a1
kangaroo	Have larger kangaroos adapted much better to changes?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a1
leopard	Is the leopard smaller than the other members of Panthera?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard smaller than the other members of Panthera?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is a leopard larger and less lanky than a cheetah?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is a leopard larger and less lanky than a cheetah?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Are large pythons potential prey for leopards?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Are large pythons potential prey for leopards?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	What may a leopard be mistaken for?	A cheetah or a jaguar	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	What may a leopard be mistaken for?	A cheetah or a jaguar	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	What is a hybrid animal resulting from a union between a leopard and a puma?	a pumapard	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	What is a hybrid animal resulting from a union between a leopard and a puma?	A pumapard	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Where do leopards often hide their kills?	in dense vegetation	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Where do leopards often hide their kills?	in dense vegetation or in trees	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	How did early naturalists distinguish between leopards and panthers?	by the length of their tails	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	How did early naturalists distinguish between leopards and panthers?	By the length of the tail, panthers having longer tails than leopards	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	What are dark leopards known as colloquially?	Black Panthers	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	What are dark leopards known as colloquially?	black panthers	hard	too hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	What shape are a leopard's black rosettes in East Africa?	circular	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	What shape are a leopard's black rosettes in East Africa?	circular	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard an Old World mammal?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard an Old World mammal?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard an Old World mammal?	.	easy	too easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard of the Felidae family?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard of the Felidae family?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard of the Felidae family?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard one of the four 'big cats'?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard one of the four 'big cats'?	yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard one of the four 'big cats'?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	Where is the leopard distributed?	southern Eurasia and Africa	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Where is the leopard distributed?	southern Eurasia and Africa, from Korea to South Africa and Spain	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Where is the leopard distributed?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	How long is a leopard's tail?	60 to 110cm	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	How long is a leopard's tail?	60-110cm	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	How long is a leopard's tail?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	How much does a leopard weigh?	Males are considerably larger than females and weigh 37 to 90 kg compared to 28 to 60 kg for females. 	medium	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	How much does a leopard weigh?	(because of ambiguity) - 28-90kg 	medium	too hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	How much does a leopard weigh?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	Does a male leopard weigh more than a female leopard?	yes	hard	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Does a male leopard weigh more than a female leopard?	yes	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	Does a male leopard weigh more than a female leopard?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	What is the difference between leopards and cheetahs?	The leopard has rosettes rather than cheetah's simple spots and the leopard is larger and less lanky than the cheetah.	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	What is the difference between leopards and cheetahs?	The leopard has rosettes rather than cheetah's simple spots, but they lack internal spots, unlike the jaguar. The leopard is larger and less lanky than the cheetah but smaller than the jaguar.	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	What is the difference between leopards and cheetahs?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	How does the distribution size of the leopard compare to the distribution of other wild cats?	As of 1996, the leopard had the largest distribution of any wild cat, although populations before and since have shown a declining trend and are fragmented outside of subsaharan Africa.	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	How does the distribution size of the leopard compare to the distribution of other wild cats?	the leopard had the largest distribution of any wild cat.	hard	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	How does the distribution size of the leopard compare to the distribution of other wild cats?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set1/a2
leopard	What resembles that of the similarly-sized cougar in the Americas?	The leopard's ecological role	NULL	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	What was one of the many species described in Linnaeus's 18th-century work, Systema Naturae?	Felis pardus	NULL	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	What sort of cats are solitary?	Leopards	NULL	hard	data/set1/a2
leopard	Are leopards circular?	No	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard solitary?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	What centred in Sierra?	The leopard men	NULL	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Felis pardus was what?	One of the many species described in Linnaeus's 18th-century work, Systema Naturae	NULL	medium	data/set1/a2
leopard	Has the New Zealand Rugby League featured the Otahuhu Leopards and then the Tamaki Leopards ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Were the Leopard men a West African secret society who practised cannibalism ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Was the leopard tank a German designed tank which entered service in 1965 ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the black color heritable and caused by only one recessive gene locus ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard -LRB- panthera pardus -RRB- an old world mammal of the felidae family and the smallest of the four (`` ` big cats ('' ' of the genus panthera , along with the tiger , lion , and jaguar?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Can a panther be any of several species of large felid?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
leopard	Is the leopard an agile and graceful predator?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a2
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein bordered by Switzerland?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein bordered by Switzerland?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein the smallest German-speaking country in the world?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein the smallest German-speaking country in the world?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Was Liechtenstein part of the ancient Roman province of Raetia?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Was Liechtenstein part of the ancient Roman province of Raetia?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	When was the first factory opened?	1836	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	When was the first factory opened?	1836	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	How many municipalities is Liechtenstein divided into?	11	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	How many municipalities is Liechtenstein divided into?	11	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What is the national currency of Liechtenstein?	Swiss franc	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What is the national currency of Liechtenstein?	Swiss franc	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Has Leichtenstein worked to promote the county's image by prosecuting international money-laundering?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What company administers Leichtenstein's railways?	Austrian Federal Railways	hard	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What company administers Leichtenstein's railways?	Austrian Federal Railways	hard	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What percentage of Liechtenstein's population is foreign-born?	two-thirds	hard	hard	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What percentage of Liechtenstein's population is foreign-born?	67%	hard	hard	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is there an airport in Liechtenstein?	No.	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is there an airport in Liechtenstein?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein heavily urbanized?	No.	easy	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein heavily urbanized?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein doubly landlocked?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein doubly landlocked?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Does Liechtenstein have an army?	No.	medium	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Does Liechtenstein have an army?	No	medium	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	When was Liechtenstein's current constitution adopted?	October 1921.	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	When was Liechtenstein's current constitution adopted?	October 1921	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What is the official language of Liechtenstein?	German.	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What is the official language of Liechtenstein?	German	medium	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What countries border Liechtenstein?	Switzerland and Austria.	hard	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What countries border Liechtenstein?	Switzerland and Austria	hard	hard	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What Roman province was Liechtenstein part of?	Raetia.	hard	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What Roman province was Liechtenstein part of?	Raetia	hard	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	How many municipalities are within Oberland?	6.	hard	too hard	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	How many municipalities are within Oberland?	6	hard	too hard	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What is the smallest German-speaking country in the world?	Liechtenstein	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	The Savings and Loans Bank was founded, as was the first cotton-weaving mill in what year?	1861	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What enjoys one of the world's highest standards of living?	Liechtenstein's population	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Does the state court rule on the conformity of laws?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What do most recognizable international company and largest employer have in common?	They are Hilti.	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is Liechtenstein heavily urbanized?	No	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Was Liechtenstein completed in November 2000?	No	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What completed in November?	the Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	The State Court rules what?	on the conformity of laws with the constitution	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	The Historical Society of the Principality of Liechtenstein plays what?	a role in preserving the culture and history of the country.	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is the museum collection also the national art collection of Liechtenstein ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is there a small heliport at Balzers in Liechtenstein available for charter helicopter flights ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Are nationals referred to by the plural : Liechtensteiners ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is it a winter sports resort , although it is perhaps best known as a tax haven ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is it a winter sports resort?	Yes	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	Is it the smallest german-speaking country in the world?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a1
Liechtenstein	What happened in moravia , lower austria , silesia , and styria , though in all cases , these territories were held in fief under other more senior feudal lords?	The Liechtenstein Dynasty acquired vast swaths of land	NULL	medium	data/set2/a1
Millard_Fillmore	Did Webster write, "I can now sleep of nights"?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Webster write, "I can now sleep of nights"?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was the arrival of Louis Kossuth (exiled leader of a failed Hungarian revolution) another issue that presented itself during Fillmore's presidency?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was the arrival of Louis Kossuth (exiled leader of a failed Hungarian revolution) another issue that presented itself during Fillmore's presidency?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did he die at 11:10 p.m. on March 8, 1874, of the after-effects of a stroke?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did he die at 11:10 p.m. on March 8, 1874, of the after-effects of a stroke?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Who got Seward elected to the senate?	Weed	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Who got Seward elected to the senate?	Weed ultimately got Seward elected to the senate	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Where was Commodore Matthew C. Perry sent to open Japan to Western trade?	Japan	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Where was Commodore Matthew C. Perry sent to open Japan to Western trade?	Commodore Matthew C. Perry send to Japan	medium	hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	What is The Remarkable Millard Fillmore?	A fake biography based on real events that happened in Fillmore's life.	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	What is The Remarkable Millard Fillmore?	In 2007, George Pendle wrote The Remarkable Millard Fillmore, a fake biography based on real events that happened in Fillmore's life	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Fillmore form a law partnership before or after he founded the private University of Buffalo?	Before.	hard	hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Fillmore form a law partnership before or after he founded the private University of Buffalo?	Law partnership founded before University of Buffalo	hard	hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Fillmore run for President a second time?	Yes	hard	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Fillmore run for President a second time?	I don't know (semantic ambiguity)	hard	too hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	How long after the death of his first wife did Fillmore marry Caroline McIntosh?	where is the death date of his first wife?	hard	too hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Millard Fillmore the thirteenth President of the United States?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Millard Fillmore the thirteenth President of the United States?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Millard Fillmore the thirteenth President of the United States?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Millard Fillmore born on January 7, 1800?	yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Millard Fillmore born on January 7, 1800?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Millard Fillmore born on January 7, 1800?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Millard Fillmore die on March 8, 1974?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Millard Fillmore die on March 8, 1974?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Millard Fillmore die on March 8, 1974?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Where was Millard Fillmore born?	in a log cabin in Summerhill, New York	medium	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Where was Millard Fillmore born?	in a log cabin in Summerhill, New York	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Where was Millard Fillmore born?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	To whom was Millard Fillmore born to?	to Nathaniel and Phoebe Millard Fillmore	medium	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	To whom was Millard Fillmore born to?	to Nathaniel and Phoebe Millard Fillmore	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	To whom was Millard Fillmore born to?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Who did Millard Fillmore fall in love with?	He fell in love with Abigail Powers	medium	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Who did Millard Fillmore fall in love with?	Abigail Powers	medium	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Who did Millard Fillmore fall in love with?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	What did Taylor and Fillmore disagree upon?	slavory issues	hard	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	What did Taylor and Fillmore disagree upon?	Taylor and Fillmore disagreed on the slavery issue in the new western territories taken from Mexico in the Mexican-American War	hard	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	What did Taylor and Fillmore disagree upon?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	How did Fillmore ascend to the presidency?	upon the death of the sitting president, Taylor	hard	medium	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	How did Fillmore ascend to the presidency?	Official White House portrait of Millard FillmoreFillmore ascended to the presidency upon the sudden and unexpected death of President Taylor in July 1850.	hard	hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	How did Fillmore ascend to the presidency?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	How did the supporters of Henry Clay feel about Fillmore in 1848?	they were ok with him	hard	too hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	How did the supporters of Henry Clay feel about Fillmore in 1848?	angry	hard	hard	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	How did the supporters of Henry Clay feel about Fillmore in 1848?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Who was first apprenticed to a fuller to learn the cloth-making trade?	millard fillmore	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	He founded the private university of buffalo on what date?	1846	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Who or what fell in love with abigail powers?	millard fillmore	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Fillmore one of the founders of the University of Buffalo?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Another primary objective of Fillmore to preserve the Union from the intensifying slavery debate?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Fillmore the second Chancellor, a position he maintained while both Vice President and President?	no	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Is Fillmore the first of two presidents to have been an indentured servant ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Is the comic strip Mallard Fillmore named after the president ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Was Fillmore the first U.S. President born after the death of a former president ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	Did Fillmore not turn down the honor , explaining that he had neither the `` literary nor scientific attainment '' to justify the degree ?	no	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Millard_Fillmore	What happened in a log cabin in summerhill , new york?	Fillmore was born	NULL	easy	data/set3/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Who was born precisely at midnight during an electrical storm , to a Serbian family in the village of Smiljan near Gospić , in the Lika region of the Croatian Krajina in Military Frontier ( part of the Austrian Empire ) , in the present-day Croatia . ?	Nikola Tesla	NULL	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Are there at least two films describing Tesla 's life ?	Yes.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a3
Nikola_Tesla	Have a number of live theatrical plays based on Tesla 's life been produced and staged worldwide ?	yes.	NULL	easy	data/set4/a3
otter	Do sea otters have long muscular tails?	no	easy	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Do sea otters have long muscular tails?	No	easy	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Can otters survive in cold water?	yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Can otters survive in cold water?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Does the giant otter inhabit South Africa?	no	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Does the giant otter inhabit South Africa?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	How many species of otter are there?	13	medium	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	How many species of otter are there?	13	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	What do river otters eat?	a variety of fish and shellfish, as well as small land mammals and birds	medium	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	What do river otters eat?	a variety of fish and shellfish, as well as small land mammals and birds	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	How much do sea otters weigh?	30 kg (about 65 pounds)	medium	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	How much do sea otters weigh?	30 kg (about 65 pounds)	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	How do sea otters insulate themselves?	a layer of air trapped in their fur(!)	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	How do sea otters insulate themselves?	As with other species of otter, they rely on a layer of air trapped in their fur, which they keep topped up by blowing into the fur from their mouths.	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	Why are sea otters nearly extinct?	They've been hunted for their fur	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	Why are sea otters nearly extinct?	Sea otters have some 200,000 hairs per square cm of skin, a rich fur for which humans hunted them	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	What is one of the challenges of re-establishing a population of Eurasian otters in the UK?	roadkill deaths	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	What is one of the challenges of re-establishing a population of Eurasian otters in the UK?	Roadkill deaths have become one of the significant threats to the success of their re-establishment. 	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	Is otter a kind of mammal?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Is otter a kind of mammal?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	How many species and genera does otter have?	13 species and 7 genera	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	How many species and genera does otter have?	13 species in 7 genera.	easy	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Do otters live in water?	yes	easy	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	Do otters live in water?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	What do river otters eat?	River otters eat a variety of fish and shellfish, as well as small land mammals and birds. 	medium	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	What do river otters eat?	River otters eat a variety of fish and shellfish, as well as small land mammals and birds.	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Where do sea otters live?	Sea otters (Enhydra lutris) live along the Pacific coast of North America. 	medium	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Where do sea otters live?	The sea otter lives actually in the sea. 	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Where does the word "otter" derive from?	The word "otter" derives from the Old English word otr, otor or oter. 	medium	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Where does the word "otter" derive from?	The word "otter" derives from the Old English word otr, otor or oter. This and cognate words in other Indo-European languages ultimately stem from a root which also gave rise to the English words "water", "wet" and "winter". 	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Does otter give birth or lay egg?	give birth	hard	too hard	data/set1/a7
otter	What drives sea otter almost to extinction?	Humans hunted them almost to extinction. 	hard	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	What drives sea otter almost to extinction?	Sea otters have some 200,000 hairs per square cm of skin, a rich fur for which humans hunted them almost to extinction. 	hard	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Why otters are considered as totem animals?	The time of year associated with this is also associated with the Aquarius sign of the Zodiac, through which the sun passes January 20-February 19. 	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	Do sea otters live along the Pacific coast?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Do sea otters live along the Pacific coast?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Are otters totem animals?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Are otters herbivores?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Are otters herbivores?	No	easy	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	What is the primary item in an otter's diet?	Fish.	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	What is the primary item in an otter's diet?	fish	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	What is an otter's den called?	Holt	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	What is an otter's den called?	holt	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Why is the giant otter becoming increasingly rare?	Poaching, habitat loss, and toxins in gold mining.  	medium	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	Why is the giant otter becoming increasingly rare?	poaching, habitat loss, and the use of mercury in illegal alluvial gold mining	medium	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	How do otters keep themselves warm without blubber?	A layer of air trapped in their fur.  	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	How do otters keep themselves warm without blubber?	a layer of air trapped in their fur	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	How are otters playful animals?	The slide down snowy slopes, apparently for sheer enjoyment.  	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	How are otters playful animals?	They slide repeatedly down snowy slopes for sheer enjoyment.	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	What animals are related to otters?	weasels, polecats, and badgers	hard	hard	data/set1/a7
otter	What traps a layer of air, and keeps them dry and warm under water?	Long guard hair	NULL	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	The collective noun romp is sometimes used for a group of what?	Otters	NULL	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Is it true that otters eat a variety of fish?	yes	NULL	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Are otters playful animals?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Are otters very active?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Are male otters dog-otters?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	An otter 's den is what?	A holt	NULL	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Sea otters eat what?	Shellfish and other invertebrates	NULL	medium	data/set1/a7
otter	Is the myth of Otter 's Ransom the starting point of the Volsunga saga ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Are Male otters dog-otters , females are bitches and babies are cubs or pups ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Is an otter 's den called a holt ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a7
otter	Have most otters fish as the primary item in their diet , supplemented by frogs , crayfish and crabs ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a7
penguin	Do penguins feed on krill?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Do penguins feed on krill?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	What is the largest living species of penguin?	Emperor Penguin	easy	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	What is the largest living species of penguin?	the Emperor Penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri)	easy	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	Do penguins live almost exclusively in the Southern Hemisphere?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Do penguins live almost exclusively in the Southern Hemisphere?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	What is "tobogganing"?	when penguins slide on their bellies across the snow	medium	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	What is "tobogganing"?	Tobogganing is when penguins slide on their bellies across the snow.	medium	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	Why are penguins countershaded?	for camouflage	medium	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	Why are penguins countershaded?	for camouflage	medium	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins afraid of humans?	no	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins afraid of humans?	no	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	How much time to penguins spend on land?	half of their life	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	How much time to penguins spend on land?	They spend half of their life on land.	hard	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	How many species of penguins are there?	between 17 and 20 living species	hard	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	How many species of penguins are there?	Penguin biodiversity varies between 17 and 20 living species, all in the subfamily Spheniscinae.	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	How are Isabelline penguins different from most penguins?	they have brown rather than black plumage	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	How are Isabelline penguins different from most penguins?	Because they are born with brown rather than black plumage.	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins birds?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins birds?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Do penguins have a better than average sense of hearing for birds?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Do penguins have a better than average sense of hearing for birds?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins considered "higher waterbirds"?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins considered "higher waterbirds"?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	What order do penguins belong to?	Sphenisciformes	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	What order do penguins belong to?	Sphenisciformes	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	What is the largest living species of penguin?	Emperor Penguin	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	What is the largest living species of penguin?	Emperor	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	How tall were the tallest prehistoric penguins?	1.80 meters	medium	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	How tall were the tallest prehistoric penguins?	as tall as an adult human	medium	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	What makes penguins so agile in the water?	Their wings have become flippers	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	What makes penguins so agile in the water?	Smooth plumage preserves a layer of air, ensuring buoyancy, wings are flippers	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	Why do penguins "tobaggan"?	It conserves energy while moving quickly	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	Why do penguins "tobaggan"?	Conserves energy while moving quickly	hard	hard	data/set1/a3
penguin	Who spend half of their life on land and half in the oceans?	Penguins	NULL	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	What is also the distance that Antarctic tourists are told to keep from penguins?	3 meters	NULL	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	What have become flippers, useless for flight in the air?	Penguins' wings	NULL	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	What happens when mothers lose a chick?	They sometimes attempt to "steal" another chick.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	Is it true that each penguin gets a turn in the center?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are all penguins countershaded?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins astonishingly agile?	In the water they are.	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Are penguins at risk?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Is it also possible that penguin comes from the Latin pinguis , fat ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Have penguins an average sense of hearing for birds ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Can larger penguins dive deep in case of need ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Is the smallest penguin species the Little Blue Penguin -LRB- also known as the Fairy Penguin -RRB- , which stands around 40 cm tall -LRB- 16 in -RRB- and weighs 1 kg -LRB- 2.2 lb -RRB- ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Is it not even known whether the gigantic palaeeudyptines constitute a monophyletic lineage , or whether gigantism was evolved independently in a much restricted Palaeeudyptinae and the Anthropornithinae ?	It is not even known.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a3
penguin	Is the largest living species the emperor penguin -LRB- aptenodytes forsteri -RRB-?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	Is the smallest penguin species the little blue penguin -LRB- also known as the fairy penguin -RRB- , which stands around 40 cm tall -LRB- 16 in -RRB- and weighs 1 kg -LRB- 2?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a3
penguin	What happened in a region not quite 2000 km south of the equator 35 mya?	At least one giant penguin.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a3
polar_bear	What is the last word on the page?	Connecticut	easy	too easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is the last word on the page?	(SSN-22)	easy	too hard	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is polar bear a mammal?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is polar bear a mammal?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is polar bear a carnivore?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is polar bear a carnivore?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is largest polar bear on record?	2200 lb	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is largest polar bear on record?	A huge male, allegedly weighing 1002 kg (2200 lb) shot at Kotzebue Sound in northwestern Alaska in 1960.	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is polar bear's skin color?	white or cream	medium	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is polar bear's skin color?	Black	medium	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How long is polar bear's guard hair?	5-15 cm	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How long is polar bear's guard hair?	5-15 cm	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is cause of polar bear's skin diseases?	mites or other parasites	hard	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is cause of polar bear's skin diseases?	Mites or other parasites	hard	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Why polar bear is a special species?	The World Conservation Union listed polar bears as a vulnerable species, one of three sub-categories of threatened status, in May 2006. Their latest estimate is that 7 out of 19 subpopulations are declining or already severely reduced.	hard	too hard	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What do fossil and DNA evidence tell us?	The polar bear diverged from the brown bear about 200 thousand years ago.	hard	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What do fossil and DNA evidence tell us?	The polar bear diverged from the brown bear roughly 200 thousand years ago.	hard	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Does a polar bear live in the Arctic?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Does a polar bear live in the Arctic?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is a polar bear white in color?	yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is a polar bear white in color?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is a polar bear at high risk of extinction?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is a polar bear at high risk of extinction?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How heavy is a male polar bear?	300-600 kg (660-1320 lb)	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How heavy is a male polar bear?	Most adult males weigh 350-650 kg	medium	too hard	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How heavy was the largest polar bear on record?	1002 kg (2200 lb) 	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How heavy was the largest polar bear on record?	He allegedly weighed 1002 kg	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What does a polar bear's fur provide?	It provides the animal with effective camouflage.	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What does a polar bear's fur provide?	A polar bear's fur provides camouflage and insulation	medium	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Do female polar bears weight more than the male?	no	hard	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Do female polar bears weight more than the male?	No	hard	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How much weight do female polar bears gain during pregnancy?	They gain double their weight.	hard	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	How much weight do female polar bears gain during pregnancy?	They double their weight during pregnancy	hard	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Can polar bears be seen under infrared photography?	Polar bears are nearly invisible under infrared photography.	hard	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Can polar bears be seen under infrared photography?	Only their breath and muzzles can be easily seen	hard	hard	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What is actually black in color?	A polar bear's skin.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What insulate it against the cold?	Its think blubber and fur.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What includes a lengthy justification of why this species is listed as vulnerable?	Database entry.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	What do with greenpeace and the natural resources defense council have in common?	They filed lawsuits in California.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Are studies insufficient evidence for global protection?	It is arguable.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Are polar bears excellent swimmers?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	A semi-aquatic marine mammal , the polar bear has what?	It has adapted for life on a combination of land, sea, and ice.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Garbage is what?	Garbage is now recycled or transported to Thompson, Manitoba.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	The bears sometimes what?	They sometimes have problems with various skin diseases with dermatitis caused sometimes by mites or other parasites.	NULL	medium	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Is the Polar Bear the mascot of Bowdoin college ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Have thumbpolar bears been made both controversial and famous for their distinctive white fur and their habitat ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Did Mitchell Taylor , the Nunavut Government Manager of Wildlife Research , not write a letter to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service arguing that local studies are insufficient evidence for global protection at this time ?	no	NULL	easy	data/set1/a4
polar_bear	Are Cubs born in December without awakening the mother ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a4
Qatar	Does Qatar rank as the eighth richest country in the world per capita?	No.	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Does Qatar rank as the eighth richest country in the world per capita?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Do nearly all Qataris profess Islam?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Do nearly all Qataris profess Islam?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Can women legally drive in Qatar?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Can women legally drive in Qatar?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	When did Qatar become an independent state?	September 3, 1971.	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	When did Qatar become an independent state?	September 3, 1971	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Where is Qatar's telecommunication system centered?	Doha.	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Where is Qatar's telecommunication system centered?	Doha	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Where did a suicide-bombing kill a teacher in 2005?	At the Doha Players Theatre.	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Where did a suicide-bombing kill a teacher in 2005?	Doha Players Theatre	medium	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Does the native pronunciation of Qatar sound like 'cutter'?	Yes.	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Does the native pronunciation of Qatar sound like 'cutter'?	no	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What is the Arabic word for municipalities?	baladiyah.	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What is the Arabic word for municipalities?	baladiyah	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What universities are in Education City?	Carnegie Mellon University, Georgetown University School of Foreign Service, Texas A&M University, Virginia Commonwealth University, and Cornell University's Weill Medical College.	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What universities are in Education City?	Carnegie Mellon University, Georgetown University School of Foreign Service, Texas A&M University, Virginia Commonwealth University, and Cornell University	hard	hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What carried with it a tacit recognition of Qatar's status as distinct from Bahrain?	The British Protectorate (per Colonel Lewis Pelly) asking to negotiate with a representative from Qatar after Bahrain's violation of the 1820 Anglo-Bahraini Treaty.	NULL	hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Qatar became an independent sovereign state in what year?	On September 3, 1971.	NULL	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What consists of a low, barren plain, covered with sand?	Much of the country.	NULL	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	How do qatar and the wider region relate?	Qatar is aiming to become a role model for economic and social transformation in the region. Large scale investment in all social and economic sectors will also lead to the development of a strong financial market.	NULL	too hard	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Was Qatar University founded in 1973?	Yes	NULL	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Is Qatar bordered by Saudi Arabia to the south?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What bordered by Saudi?	Qatar	NULL	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Who served as the headquarters and one of the main launching sites of the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 ?	Qatar.	NULL	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Has Qatar a modern Telecommunication system centered in Doha ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Was Qatar University founded in 1973 ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Did the Qataris not choose as their negotiator the respected entrepreneur and long-time resident of Doha , Muhammed bin Thani ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Will oil and gas probably remain the backbone of Qatar 's economy for some time to come ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Has it been created with a long term perspective to support the development of Qatar and the wider region , develop local and regional markets , and strengthen the links between the energy based economies and global financial markets ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	What happened in these positions in english?	These allophones cannot occur there.	NULL	medium	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Can these allophones not occur in these positions in english?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Qatar	Is -RRB- , officially the state of qatar -LRB- arabic (: : transliterated as dawlat qatar -RRB- , an arab emirate in southwest asia?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a3
Romania	Does Romania border Hungary?	Yes.	easy	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	Does Romania border Hungary?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is Romania a secular state?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is Romania a secular state?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is the president elected by popular vote?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is the president elected by popular vote?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	How many counties is Romania divided into?	41.	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	How many counties is Romania divided into?	forty-one	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the highest mountain in Romania?	Moldoveanu Peak.	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the highest mountain in Romania?	Moldoveanu Peak	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the official language of Romania?	Romanian.	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the official language of Romania?	Romanian	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is the Romanian economy doing well?	Yes.	hard	too hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Are there many Roma in Romania?	No.	hard	too hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Are there many Roma in Romania?	no	hard	too hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	How many territories joined to form Romania?	2.	hard	too hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	How many territories joined to form Romania?	2	hard	too hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Does Romania share a border with Ukraine?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Does Romania share a border with Ukraine?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Did Romania declare neutrality during World War I?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Did Romania declare neutrality during World War I?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Does Romania share the same language with Moldova?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Does Romania share the same language with Moldova?	Practically	easy	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	Who was the first gymnast to score a perfect "ten"?	Nadia Comăneci	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	Who was the first gymnast to score a perfect "ten"?	Nadia Comăneci	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the largest city in Romania?	Bucharest	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the largest city in Romania?	Bucharest	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the largest ethnic minority in Romania?	Hungarians	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What is the largest ethnic minority in Romania?	Hungarians	medium	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	How many countries in Europe are bigger than Romania?  	eleven	hard	hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	How many countries in Europe are bigger than Romania?  	Eleven	hard	too hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Why doesn't Romania have a state religion?  	Romania is a secular state	hard	hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Why wasn't Romania neutral during World War II?	it received a Soviet ultimatum	hard	hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Why wasn't Romania neutral during World War II?	The Soviets threatened invasion.	hard	hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Sibiu, a large city in Transylvania, was chosen as European Capital of Culture in what year?	2007	NULL	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	What are approximately 42,000 years old and have been nicknamed`` John of Anina''?	the remains (the lower jaw) of the oldest modern human	NULL	hard	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is it true that romania has a population of 21,698,181?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	What do economy and law have in common?	(not sure how to answer this)	NULL		data/set2/a7
Romania	What did Tourism in Romania attract in 2005?	investments worth 400 million euros	NULL	medium	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is Romania a secular state?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is Romania a semi-presidential unitary state?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a7
Romania		NULL	NULL	NULL	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is Romania a semi-presidential democratic republic where executive functions are shared between the president and the prime minister ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Was Gellu Naum the leader of the surrealist movement in Romania ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Was the Bucharest Metro only opened in 1979 ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is romania -LRB- , -RRB- a country in southeastern europe?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Romania	Is romania a semi-presidential unitary state?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a7
Singapore	Do singaporeans enjoy squid?	Yes, they do.	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Do singaporeans enjoy squid?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Do singaporeans enjoy squid?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Did Singapore's standard of living decrease since independence?	No, the standard living was raised.	easy	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Did Singapore's standard of living decrease since independence?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Did Singapore's standard of living decrease since independence?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Did the media contribute 15.6% to Singapore's GDP in 2001?	No, it contributed 1.56% to GDP in 2001.	easy	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Did the media contribute 15.6% to Singapore's GDP in 2001?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Did the media contribute 15.6% to Singapore's GDP in 2001?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How many people use the bus network daily?	More than 2.78 million people.	medium	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How many people use the bus network daily?	2.78 million people	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How many people use the bus network daily?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Where did Orang Laut people live?	Orang Laut people lived around the coast, rivers and smaller islands.	medium	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Where did Orang Laut people live?	Several hundred indigenous Orang Laut people also lived around the coast, rivers and smaller islands.	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Where did Orang Laut people live?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the MRT?	One of three heavy rail passenger transport lines in Singapore.	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the MRT?	Mass Rapid Transit system	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the MRT?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How is Singapore's climate characterized?	Singapore has a tropical rainforest climate with no distinctive seasons.	hard	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How is Singapore's climate characterized?	Its climate is characterized by uniform temperature and pressure, high humidity, and abundant rainfall	hard	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How is Singapore's climate characterized?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How much increase in the media's contribution to GDP is the government seeking?	The government seeks to increase its GDP contribution to 3% by 2012. 	hard	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How much increase in the media's contribution to GDP is the government seeking?	the government seeks to increase its GDP contribution to 3% by 2012. 	hard	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How much increase in the media's contribution to GDP is the government seeking?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How many days did it take the Imperial Japanese Army to win the Battle of Singapore?	Six days	hard	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How many days did it take the Imperial Japanese Army to win the Battle of Singapore?	6 days	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How many days did it take the Imperial Japanese Army to win the Battle of Singapore?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Is Singapore located at the southern tip of the Korean Penisula?	no	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Is Singapore located at the southern tip of the Korean Penisula?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Is Singapore a city-state?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Is Singapore a city-state?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Has Sang Nila Utama visited Singapore?	yes	easy	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Has Sang Nila Utama visited Singapore?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What does "singa" mean?	lion	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	When is the first record of settlement in Singapore?	second century AD	medium	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	When is the first record of settlement in Singapore?	The first records of settlement in Singapore are from the second century AD.	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Which nation invaded Singapore during World War II?	Japan	medium	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Which nation invaded Singapore during World War II?	During World War II, the Imperial Japanese Army invaded Malaya, culminating in the Battle of Singapore.	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Why Churchill called the occupation of Singapor by Janpan during WWII "Britain's greatest defeat"?	The British were defeated in six days	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Was Lee Kuan Yew a successful leader of Singapore?	yes	hard	too hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Was Lee Kuan Yew a successful leader of Singapore?	Yes.	hard	too hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	When did Goh Chok Tong succeed Lee as Prime Minister?	In 1990, Goh Chok Tong succeeded Lee as Prime Minister.	easy	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	When did Goh Chok Tong succeed Lee as Prime Minister?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the primary domestic source of water supply?	The primary domestic source of water supply in Singapore is rainfall.	easy	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the primary domestic source of water supply?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the national language of Singapore?	The national language of Singapore is Malay.	easy	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the national language of Singapore?	NULL	easy	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Where is the National Orchid Garden?	Singapore Botanic Gardens.	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Where is the National Orchid Garden?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Why are relations with Malaysia and Indonesia important?	Due to obvious geographical reasons, relations with Malaysia and Indonesia are most important.	medium	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Why are relations with Malaysia and Indonesia important?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the most densely populated independent country in the world?	Monaco	medium	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the most densely populated independent country in the world?	NULL	medium	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Who did Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles work for?	British East India Company	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Who did Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles work for?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	When was Lee Kuan Yew prime minister of Singapore?	1959	hard	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	When was Lee Kuan Yew prime minister of Singapore?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the punishment for first-degree murder?	There are laws which allow capital punishment in Singapore for first-degree murder and drug trafficking.	hard	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What is the punishment for first-degree murder?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What established a trading post on the island in 1819?	British East India Company 	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What used Singapore as a strategic trading post along the spice route?	British	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	What became one of the most important commercial and military centres of the British Empire?	Singapore	NULL	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Who boasted a sizeable community of 100,000 by 1869?	British India office	NULL	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	How do reservoirs and water relate?	By 2001, there were 19 raw water reservoirs, 9 treatment works and 14 storage or service reservoirs locally to serve domestic needs. 	NULL	hard	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Is it true that singapore has several long - standing disputes with malaysia?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Has Singapore Changi Airport a network of 81 airlines connecting Singapore to 185 cities in 58 countries ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Has Singapore a network of reservoirs and water catchment areas ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Has Urbanization eliminated many areas of former primary rainforest , with the only remaining area of primary rainforest being Bukit Timah Nature Reserve ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Does the economy not depend heavily on exports refining imported goods , especially in manufacturing ?	No	NULL	medium	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Is singapore -LRB- ; (: ; , -RRB- , officially the republic of singapore -LRB- ; (: ; , -RRB- , an island nation located at the southern tip of the malay peninsula?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Singapore	Is singapore the 17th wealthiest country in the world in terms of gdp per capita?	No	NULL	easy	data/set2/a2
Theodore_Roosevelt	Was Thedore Roosevelt  a member of the Republican Party?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Was Thedore Roosevelt  a member of the Republican Party?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Does Theodore Roosevelt have a brother?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Does Theodore Roosevelt have a brother?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Theodore Roosevelt go to Harvard?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Theodore Roosevelt go to Harvard?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Where was Theodore Roosevelt born?	28 East 20th Street in the modern-day Gramercy section of New York City	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Where was Theodore Roosevelt born?	a four-story brownstone at 28 East 20th Street, in the modern-day Gramercy section of New York City	medium	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	What did Roosevelt do to improve his physical condition?	Roosevelt took up exercise	medium	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	What did Roosevelt do to improve his physical condition?	He started boxing	medium	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Why did Roosevelt start Boxing lessons?	To deal with bullies	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Why did Roosevelt start Boxing lessons?	To deal with bullies	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	What was the nickname of Theodore Roosevelt's sister Anna?	Bamie as a child and Bye as an adult	hard	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	What was the nickname of Theodore Roosevelt's sister Anna?	Bamie	hard	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	What was Roosevelt's justification for supporting desegregation of schools in New York?	Noting that his children had been educated with other races and there was nothing wrong with it	hard	too hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	What was Roosevelt's justification for supporting desegregation of schools in New York?	that his children had been educated with other races and there was nothing wrong with it	hard	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	How did newspapers respond to Roosevelt inviting Brooker T. Washington to dinner at the White House?	"mixing of the races on social occassions"	hard	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	How did newspapers respond to Roosevelt inviting Brooker T. Washington to dinner at the White House?	They outraged.	hard	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Theodore Roosevelt study Judo?	No	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Theodore Roosevelt study Judo?	No clue	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Roosevelt receive a Medal of Honor?	yes	easy	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Roosevelt receive a Medal of Honor?	nein	easy	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Roosevelt study biology?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Roosevelt study biology?	He was strong in biology.	easy	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Where was Theodore Roosevelt from?	Gramercy section of New York City	medium	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Where was Theodore Roosevelt from?	New York City	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Who was Roosevelt's presidential hero?	Lincoln was Roosevelt's presidential hero.	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Who was Roosevelt's presidential hero?	Lincoln was Roosevelt's presidential hero	medium	easy	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	When did Roosevelt die?	On January 6, 1919, Roosevelt died in his sleep.	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	When did Roosevelt die?	On January 6, 1919, Roosevelt died in his sleep.	medium	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Who helped to fund Roosevelt's African safari?	Financed by Andrew Carnegie and his own proposed writings	hard	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Who helped to fund Roosevelt's African safari?	Andrew Carnegie	hard	medium	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Roosevelt support racial integration in schools?	yes	hard	too hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Did Roosevelt support racial integration in schools?	He supported a bill allowing school desegregation in New York State.	hard	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Was Roosevelt's family rich?	yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a7
Theodore_Roosevelt	Was Roosevelt's family rich?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a7
turtle	Are turtles ectothermic?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtles ectothermic?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Does the mother care for the young?	No	easy	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Does the mother care for the young?	no	easy	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtles pets?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtles pets?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	What shape are the eggs of the larest species of turtle?	Spherical	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	What shape are the eggs of the larest species of turtle?	spherical	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	How often do turtles breed?	Every few years or more	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	What do all turtles and tortoises breathe?	air	medium	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	What do all turtles and tortoises breathe?	air	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	How do turtles reproduce?	They lay eggs	hard	too hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	How do turtles reproduce?	they lay eggs	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What has been discovered about turtles organs?	They do not gradually break down or become less efficient over time	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What has been discovered about turtles organs?	they do not break down	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What suborder of turtle draws its head into its shell?	Pleurodira	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What suborder of turtle draws its head into its shell?	Pleurodira	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	Do sea turtles lay eggs on dry sandy beaches?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Do sea turtles lay eggs on dry sandy beaches?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are Pleurodira known as side-necked turtles?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are Pleurodira known as side-necked turtles?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtles a part of the Flying Spaghetti Monster?	*shrug*	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	How many suborders are turtles divided into?	Three.	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	How many suborders are turtles divided into?	three	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Name a turtle popularly kept as a pet.	Russian Tortoises	medium	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	Name a turtle popularly kept as a pet.	Russian Tortoises	medium	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	Name four related articles for the article on turtles.	Triassic, Ernst Haeckel, Kunstformen der Natur, Animal	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Name four related articles for the article on turtles.	Triassic, Ernst Haeckel, Kunstformen der Natur, Animal	medium	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	If a turtle egg was kept warm, what would likely hatch?	A female turtle.	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	If a turtle egg was kept warm, what would likely hatch?	A female turtle	hard	too hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What do turles use to breathe in the water?	Papillae	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	Why are side-necked turtles called side-necked turtles?	Because of the way they withdraw their heads into their shells.	hard	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Why are side-necked turtles called side-necked turtles?	The way they withdraw their heads into their shells.	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	Do turtles lay eggs underwater?	No	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Do turtles lay eggs underwater?	no	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtle eggs leathery and soft?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtle eggs leathery and soft?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtles being examined for longevity genes?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtles being examined for longevity genes?	yes	easy	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	What suborder of turtles is extinct?	Paracryptodira	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	What suborder of turtles is extinct?	Paracryptodira	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	What do turtle eggs preared to eat consist mainly of?	Yolk	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Where do sea turtles lay their eggs?	Holes Dug into the Mud or Sand	medium	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Where do sea turtles lay their eggs?	holes dug into mud or sand	medium	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What is the smallest suborder of turtles?	Pleurodira	hard	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	What is the smallest suborder of turtles?	Pleurodira	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What are turtle eggs covered in when they incubate?	Mud or Sand	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What are turtle eggs covered in when they incubate?	mud or sand	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What type of creatures breathe air and don't lay eggs underwater?	Amniotes	hard	hard	data/set1/a9
turtle	What type of creatures breathe air and don't lay eggs underwater?	amnoites	hard	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	What are deposited in holes dug into mud or sand?	eggs	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	What sort of turtles are ectothermic?	all of them	NULL	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are turtles ectothermic?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are the largest turtles aquatic?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Is aquatic respiration in Australian freshwater turtles being studied?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	These projections , called papillae , have what?	a rich blood supply	NULL	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	The eggs of the largest species are what?	spherical	NULL	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Has this inspired genetic researchers to begin examining the turtle genome for longevity genes ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Can turtles take many years to reach breeding age ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are Immature sea turtles not cared for by the adults ?	yes	NULL	medium	data/set1/a9
turtle	Are the Pleurodira sometimes known as the side-necked turtles , a reference to the way they withdraw their heads into their shells ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
turtle	Does the Order Testudines not include both extant -LRB- living -RRB- and extinct species , the earliest known turtles being from around 215 million years ago ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set1/a9
Ulysses_S._Grant	Was Ulysses Grant a general in the American Civil War?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Was Ulysses Grant a general in the American Civil War?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Was Grant's father-in-law a Democrat?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Was Grant's father-in-law a Democrat?	yup	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Did Ulysses win the Battle of Champion Hill?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Did Ulysses win the Battle of Champion Hill?	you betcha	easy	hard	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Who was Grant's brother in law?	Fred Dent	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Who was Grant's brother in law?	Fred Dent	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Where was Grant born?	Point Pleasant, Ohio	medium	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Where was Grant born?	A log cabin in Point Pleasant, Clermont County, Ohio	medium	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	What was Grant's political affiliation?	Republican	medium	hard	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	What was Grant's political affiliation?	Republican	medium	hard	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Why did Grant say "Damn, I had nothing to do with this batte."?	It went well.	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Why did Grant say "Damn, I had nothing to do with this batte."?	Because the generals under him acted on their own.	hard	too hard	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Did Horace Greenley lose in the presidential elections of 1872?	Yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Did Horace Greenley lose in the presidential elections of 1872?	si	hard	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Why did Grant think that war was unjust?	He thought it was designed to gain land open to slavery.	hard	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Why did Grant think that war was unjust?	He accepted the theory that it was designed to gain land open to slavery.	hard	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Who achieved international fame as the leading Union general in the American Civil War?	Grant	NULL	too easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Grant was elected president as a Republican in what year?	1868	NULL	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Who took a hard line that reduced violence by groups like the Ku Klux Klan?	Grant	NULL	too easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	When did he vote for democrat james buchanan?	1856	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Who did President Lincoln promote of major general in the regular army, effective July 4?	Grant	NULL	too easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Was Grant elected president as a Republican?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	What was from Pennsylvania?	His father	NULL	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Was it a two-sentence description that completely caught the essence of Ulysses S. Grant ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Was Grant 's favorite brand of bourbon whiskey Old Crow ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Had he smoked only sporadically ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Did Grant & Perkins not sell harnesses , saddles , and other leather goods and purchase hides from farmers in the prosperous Galena area ?	they did	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	Is the famous dragon gate at the entrance to the district at the corner of Grant and Bush Street ?	yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	What happened in 1865?	he accepted the surrender of Robert E. Lee	NULL	medium	data/set3/a5
Ulysses_S._Grant	What happened in recent years?	his reputation as president has improved	NULL	medium	data/set3/a5
Uruguay	Is Uruguay located in the northwesten part of Africa?	No.	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay located in the northwesten part of Africa?	no	easy	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay's capital Montevideo?	Yes.	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay's capital Montevideo?	yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Does Uruguay have cold summers?	No.	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Does Uruguay have cold summers?	no	easy	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Who founded Montevideo?	The Spanish.	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Who founded Montevideo?	the Spanish	medium	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Where is Uruguay's oldest church?	San Carlos, Maldonado.	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Where is Uruguay's oldest church?	San Carlos, Maldonado	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Who heavily influenced the architecture and culture of Montevideo?	European immigrants.	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Who heavily influenced the architecture and culture of Montevideo?	European immigrants	medium	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What are poor neighborhoods called informally?	Cantegriles.	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What are poor neighborhoods called informally?	Cantegriles	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is uruguay's landscape mountainous?	No.	hard	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is uruguay's landscape mountainous?	not really?	hard	too hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What religion do most Uruguayans profess?	None.	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What religion do most Uruguayans profess?	Roman Catholic	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay located in South America?	Yes. It's located in the southeastern part	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay located in South America?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Can citizens propose changes to the Constitution?	Yes. People are allowed to challenge laws.	easy	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Can citizens propose changes to the Constitution?	Yes	easy	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Did Uruguay host the first ever World Cup?	Yes, in 1930.	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Did Uruguay host the first ever World Cup?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Who founded Montevideo?	By the Spanish, in the early 18th century	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Who founded Montevideo?	Montevideo was founded by the Spanish in the early 18th century as a military stronghold.	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How many square kilometres of continental land is Uruguay?	176.215 km\A9\F7 	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How many square kilometres of continental land is Uruguay?	176,214 square kilometres	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How much of the population is of white European descent?	88%	medium	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How much of the population is of white European descent?	Approximately 88% of its population are of prevalently white European descent.	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Why was the capital of Uruguay founded?	For a military stronghold.	hard	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Why was the capital of Uruguay founded?	Uruguay's capital, Montevideo, was founded by the Spanish in the early 18th century as a military stronghold.	hard	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How many times has Uruguay won the World Cup?	Twice. 	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How many times has Uruguay won the World Cup?	On two or more occasions.	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How much is the average income of an African woman compared to a European man?	African women earns 0.65 * 0.718  = 46.67% of a European man earns in average	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Does Uruguay recognize same-sex civil unions?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Does Uruguay recognize same-sex civil unions?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Does Uruguay border French Guiana?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Does Uruguay border French Guiana?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay's warmest month June?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay's warmest month June?	No	easy	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What does a citizen use to propose changes to the Constitution?	Referendum	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What does a citizen use to propose changes to the Constitution?	Plebiscite	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Where is Uruguay's oldest church?	San Carlos, Maldonado	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Where is Uruguay's oldest church?	San Carlos, Maldonado	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What religions are found in Uruguay?	Roman Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, and nonprofessing.	medium	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What religions are found in Uruguay?	Roman Catholic, Protestant, Jewish	medium	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What has Uruguay done to be competitive in agriculture?	Labeling as "Natural" or "Ecological"	hard	too hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What has Uruguay done to be competitive in agriculture?	Use low inputs of labour, technology, and capital, which results in lower yields but also opens the door for Uruguay to market its products as "natural" or "ecological"	hard	too hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What are the names of Uruguay's political parties?	Partido Colorado and Partido Blanco	hard	too hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What are the names of Uruguay's political parties?	Partido Blanco and Partido Colorado	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay the smallest soverign nation in South America?	No	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay the smallest soverign nation in South America?	No	hard	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What was founded by the Spanish in the early 18th century as a military stronghold?	Montevideo	NULL	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What has many possible meanings?	(What?)	NULL	too hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	How do india and latin america relate?	Uruguay exports architectural services to India and Latin America	NULL	hard	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	What did Uruguay win in 1828?	Its independence	NULL	medium	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay very common?	No?	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is The climate in Uruguay temperate?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is the main sport in Uruguay football ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay 's oldest church in San Carlos , Maldonado ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is Uruguay a member of the Cairns Group of exporters of agricultural products ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is it widely considered the most secular nation in Latin America ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is it the second smallest independent country in south america , larger only than suriname and the french overseas department of french guiana?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Uruguay	Is it a constitutional democracy , where the president fulfills the roles of both head of state and head of government?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set2/a9
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Woodrow Wilson the thirtieth President of the United States?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Woodrow Wilson the thirtieth President of the United States?	No	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Woodrow Wilson create the League of Nations?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Woodrow Wilson create the League of Nations?	Yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did the U.S. join the League of Nations?	no	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did the U.S. join the League of Nations?	No	easy	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where was the League of Nations created?	Paris	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where was the League of Nations created?	Paris	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	When was Woodrow Wilson born?	December 28, 1856	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	When was Woodrow Wilson born?	December 28, 1856	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Who was President when Wilson finished Congressional Government?	Grover Cleveland	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Who was President when Wilson finished Congressional Government?	Grover Cleveland	medium	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What field did Woodrow Wilson leave law practice to study?	history and political science	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What field did Woodrow Wilson leave law practice to study?	Government	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What caused Wilson to ask Congress to declare war on the Central Powers?	German began unrestricted submarine warfare	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What caused Wilson to ask Congress to declare war on the Central Powers?	World War I	hard	too hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What was more damaging than moving students into colleges?	His confrontation with Andrew Fleming West	hard	too hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson a member of the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson a member of the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity?	Totally.\t	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson an automobile enthusiast?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson an automobile enthusiast?	ouai	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson's father own slaves?	yes	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson's father own slaves?	Yeah	easy	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where is Wilson buried?	He was buried in Washington National Cathedral	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where is Wilson buried?	Washington National Cathedral	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where did Wilson attend law school?	Wilson attended law school at University of Virginia	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where did Wilson attend law school?	University of Virginia	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where was Woodrow Wilson born?	Woodrow Wilson was born in Staunton, Virginia	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Where was Woodrow Wilson born?	Staunton, Virginia	medium	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson support desegregation?	no	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson support desegregation?	Not in the slightest.	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson support the committee system?	no	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson support the committee system?	No.	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson have any siblings?	yes	hard	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson have any siblings?	NULL	hard	NULL	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What was Scots-Irish and Scottish?	His ancestry	NULL	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What defended slavery, owned slaves and set up a Sunday school for them?	His father	NULL	medium	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Who did Wilson win in 1917?	Irish Americans	NULL	hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson a remarkably effective writer and thinker?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What lived in Columbia?	Wilson	NULL	too hard	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson president of the American Political Science Association in 1910 ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did he not cast his ballot for John M. Palmer , the presidential candidate of the National Democratic Party , or Gold Democrats , a short-lived party that supported a gold standard , low tariffs , and limited government ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Did Wilson not spend 1914 through the beginning of 1917 trying to keep America out of the war in Europe ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	Was Wilson , a staunch opponent of antisemitism , sympathetic to the plight of Jews , especially in Poland and in France ?	Yes	NULL	easy	data/set3/a8
Woodrow_Wilson	What happened in 1917?	raised billions through Liberty loans, imposed an income tax, set up the War Industries Board, promoted labor union growth, supervised agriculture and food production through the Lever Act, took over control of the railroads, and suppressed anti-war movements	NULL	medium	data/set3/a8


Page semi-protected
Marketing
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
For the magazine, see Marketing (magazine).
	
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)
This article may have too many section headers dividing up its content. (January 2018)
This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. (January 2018)
This article needs additional citations for verification. (February 2008)
Marketing

    Marketing Marketing management

Key concepts

    Distribution Pricing Retail Service Activation Brand licensing Brand management Co-creation Corporate identity Dominance Effectiveness Ethics Mystery shopping Promotion Research Segmentation Strategy Account-based marketing Digital marketing Product marketing Social marketing Influencer marketing Attribution Annoyance factor

Promotional content

    Advertising Branding Corporate anniversary Direct marketing Loyalty marketing Mobile marketing On-hold messaging Personal selling Premiums Prizes Product placement Propaganda Publicity Sales promotion Sex in advertising Underwriting spot

Promotional media

    Behavioral targeting Brand ambassador Display advertising Drip marketing In-game advertising Mobile advertising Native advertising New media Online advertising Out-of-home advertising Point of sale Product demonstration Promotional merchandise Visual merchandising Web banner Word-of-mouth

    vte

Marketing is the study and management of exchange relationships.[1][2] It is the business process of identifying, anticipating and satisfying customers' needs and wants. Because marketing is used to attract customers, it is one of the primary components of business management and commerce.[3] Marketers can direct product to other businesses (B2B marketing) or directly to consumers (B2C marketing).[4]

Regardless of who is being marketed to, several factors, including the perspective the marketers will use. These market orientations determine how marketers will approach the planning stage of marketing.[5] This leads into the marketing mix, which outlines the specifics of the product and how it will be sold.[6][7] This can in turn be affected by the environment surrounding the product [8], the results of marketing research and market research[9], and the characteristics of the product's target market.[10]

Once these factors are determined, marketers must then decide what methods will be used to market the product.[4] This decision is based on the factors analyzed in the planning stage as well as where the product is in the product life cycle.[4]
Contents

    1 Definition
    2 Concept
    3 B2B and B2C Marketing
        3.1 B2B marketing
        3.2 B2C marketing
        3.3 C2B marketing
        3.4 C2C marketing
        3.5 Differences in B2B and B2C marketing
    4 Orientations
        4.1 Product
        4.2 Sales
        4.3 Production
        4.4 Marketing
        4.5 Societal marketing
    5 The Marketing Mix
        5.1 The 4Ps
            5.1.1 Outline
            5.1.2 Criticisms
            5.1.3 Modifications and extensions
        5.2 The 4Cs
            5.2.1 Outline
    6 Environment
        6.1 Macro
        6.2 Micro
        6.3 Internal
    7 Research
    8 Segmentation
    9 Promotional Mix
        9.1 Personal selling
        9.2 Sales promotion
        9.3 Public relations
        9.4 Advertising
        9.5 Social Media
    10 The Marketing Plan
        10.1 Process
        10.2 Levels of marketing objectives within an organization
    11 Product life cycle
    12 See also
        12.1 Types of marketing
        12.2 Marketing orientations or philosophies
    13 References
    14 Bibliography
    15 External links

Definition

Marketing is defined by the American Marketing Association as "the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large".[11] The term developed from the original meaning which referred literally to going to market with goods for sale. From a sales process engineering perspective, marketing is "a set of processes that are interconnected and interdependent with other functions of a business aimed at achieving customer interest and satisfaction".[12]

Philip Kotler defined marketing as "Satisfying needs and wants through an exchange process".[13] and a decade later defines it as “a social and managerial process by which individuals and groups obtain what they want and need through creating, offering and exchanging products of value with others.”[13]

The Chartered Institute of Marketing defines marketing as "the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating and satisfying customer requirements profitably".[14] A similar concept is the value-based marketing which states the role of marketing to contribute to increasing shareholder value.[15] In this context, marketing can be defined as "the management process that seeks to maximise returns to shareholders by developing relationships with valued customers and creating a competitive advantage".[15]

In the past, marketing practice tended to be seen as a creative industry, which included advertising, distribution and selling. However, because the academic study of marketing makes extensive use of social sciences, psychology, sociology, mathematics, economics, anthropology and neuroscience, the profession is now widely recognized as a science,[16] allowing numerous universities to offer Master-of-Science (MSc) programs.[17]

The process of marketing is that of bringing a product to market, which includes these steps: broad market research; market targeting and market segmentation; determining distribution, pricing and promotion strategies; developing a communications strategy; budgeting; and visioning long-term market development goals.[18] Many parts of the marketing process (e.g. product design, art director, brand management, advertising, inbound marketing, copywriting etc.) involve use of the creative arts.[citation needed][19]
Concept

The 'marketing concept' proposes that to complete its organizational objectives, an organization should anticipate the needs and wants of potential consumers and satisfy them more effectively than its competitors. This concept originated from Adam Smith's book The Wealth of Nations but would not become widely used until nearly 200 years later.[20] Marketing and Marketing Concepts are directly related.

Given the centrality of customer needs, and wants in marketing, a rich understanding of these concepts is essential:[21]

    Needs: Something necessary for people to live a healthy, stable and safe life. When needs remain unfulfilled, there is a clear adverse outcome: a dysfunction or death. Needs can be objective and physical, such as the need for food, water, and shelter; or subjective and psychological, such as the need to belong to a family or social group and the need for self-esteem.
    Wants: Something that is desired, wished for or aspired to. Wants are not essential for basic survival and are often shaped by culture or peer-groups.
    Demands: When needs and wants are backed by the ability to pay, they have the potential to become economic demands.

Marketing research, conducted for the purpose of new product development or product improvement, is often concerned with identifying the consumer's unmet needs.[22] Customer needs are central to market segmentation which is concerned with dividing markets into distinct groups of buyers on the basis of "distinct needs, characteristics, or behaviors who might require separate products or marketing mixes."[23] Needs-based segmentation (also known as benefit segmentation) "places the customers' desires at the forefront of how a company designs and markets products or services."[24] Although needs-based segmentation is difficult to do in practice, it has been proved to be one of the most effective ways to segment a market.[25][22] In addition, a great deal of advertising and promotion is designed to show how a given product's benefits meet the customer's needs, wants or expectations in a unique way.[26]
B2B and B2C Marketing

The two major segments of marketing are business-to-business (B2B) marketing and business-to-consumer (B2C) marketing. [4]
B2B marketing

B2B (business-to-business) marketing refers to any marketing strategy or content that is geared towards a business or organization. Any company that sells products or services to other businesses or organizations (vs. consumers) typically uses B2B marketing strategies.

Examples of products sold through B2B marketing include:

    Major equipment
    Accessory equipment
    Raw materials
    Component parts
    Processed materials
    Supplies
    Business services[4]

The four major categories of B2B product purchasers are:

    Producers- use products sold by B2B marketing to make their own goods (e.g.: Mattel buying plastics to make toys)
    Resellers- buy B2B products to sell through retail or wholesale establishments (e.g.: Walmart buying vacuums to sell in stores)
    Governments- buy B2B products for use in government projects (e.g.: purchasing contractor services to repair infrastructure)
    Institutions- use B2B products to continue operation (e.g.: schools buying printers for office use) [4]

B2C marketing

Business-to-consumer marketing, or B2C marketing, refers to the tactics and strategies in which a company promotes its products and services to individual people.

Traditionally, this could refer to individuals shopping for personal products in a broad sense. More recently the term B2C refers to the online selling of consumer products.[27]
C2B marketing

Consumer-to-business marketing or C2B marketing is a business model where the end consumers create products and services which are consumed by businesses and organizations. It is diametrically opposed to the popular concept of B2C or Business- to- Consumer where the companies make goods and services available to the end consumers.
C2C marketing

Customer to customer marketing or C2C marketing represents a market environment where one customer purchases goods from another customer using a third-party business or platform to facilitate the transaction. C2C companies are a new type of model that has emerged with e-commerce technology and the sharing economy.[28]
Differences in B2B and B2C marketing

The different goals of B2B and B2C marketing lead to differences in the B2B and B2C markets. The main differences in these markets are demand, purchasing volume, number of customers, customer concentration, distribution, buying nature, buying influences, negotiations, reciprocity, leasing and promotional methods.[4]

    Demand: B2B demand is derived because businesses buy products based on how much demand there is for the final consumer product. Businesses buy products based on customer's wants and needs. B2C demand is primarily because customers buy products based on their own wants and needs.[4]
    Purchasing volume: Businesses buy products in large volumes to distribute to consumers. Consumers buy products in smaller volumes suitable for personal use.[4]
    Number of customers: There are relatively fewer businesses to market to than direct consumers.[4]
    Customer concentration: Businesses that specialize in a particular market tend to be geographically concentrated while customers that buy products from these businesses are not concentrated.[4]
    Distribution: B2B products pass directly from the producer of the product to the business while B2C products must additionally go through a wholesaler or retailer.[4]
    Buying nature: B2B purchasing is a formal process done by professional buyers and sellers, while B2C purchasing is informal.[4]
    Buying influences: B2B purchasing is influenced by multiple people in various departments such as quality control, accounting, and logistics while B2C marketing is only influenced by the person making the purchase and possibly a few others.[4]
    Negotiations: In B2B marketing, negotiating for lower prices or added benefits is commonly accepted while in B2C marketing (particularly in Western cultures) prices are fixed.[4]
    Reciprocity: Businesses tend to buy from businesses they sell to. For example, a business that sells printer ink is more likely to buy office chairs from a supplier that buys the business's printer ink. In B2C marketing, this does not occur because consumers are not also selling products.[4]
    Leasing: Businesses tend to lease expensive items while consumers tend to save up to buy expensive items.[4]
    Promotional methods: In B2B marketing, the most common promotional method is personal selling. B2C marketing mostly uses sales promotion, public relations, advertising, and social media.[4]

Orientations
Main article: History of marketing § Orientations or philosophies that inform marketing practice

A marketing orientation has been defined as a "philosophy of business management."[5] or "a corporate state of mind"[29] or as an "organisation[al] culture"[30] Although scholars continue to debate the precise nature of specific orientations that inform marketing practice, the most commonly cited orientations are as follows:[31]
Product

A firm employing a product orientation is mainly concerned with the quality of its product. A product orientation is based on the assumption that all things being equal, consumers will purchase products of superior quality. The approach is most effective when the firm has deep insights into customer needs and desires as derived from research or intuition and understands consumer's quality expectations and price consumers are willing to pay. Although the product orientation has largely been supplanted by the marketing orientation, firms practicing a product orientation can still be found in haute couture and arts marketing.[32][33]
Sales
Further information: History of marketing § Selling orientation

A sales orientation focuses on the selling/promotion of the firm's existing products, rather than developing new products to satisfy unmet needs or wants. This orientation seeks to attain the highest possible sales through promotion and direct sales techniques.[34] The sales orientation "is typically practiced with unsought goods."[35] One study found that industrial companies are more likely to hold a sales orientation than consumer goods companies.[36] The approach may also suit scenarios in which a firm holds dead stock, or otherwise sells a product that is in high demand, with little likelihood of changes in consumer tastes diminishing demand.

A 2011 meta analyses[37] found that the factors with the greatest impact on sales performance are a salesperson's sales related knowledge (knowledge of market segments, sales presentation skills, conflict resolution, and products), degree of adaptiveness (changing behavior based on the aforementioned knowledge), role clarity (salesperson's role is expressly to sell), cognitive aptitude (intelligence) and work engagement (motivation and interest in a sales role).
Production
Further information: History of marketing § Production orientation

A firm focusing on a production orientation specializes in producing as much as possible of a given product or service in order to achieve economies of scale or economies of scope. A production orientation may be deployed when a high demand for a product or service exists, coupled with certainty that consumer tastes and preferences remain relatively constant (similar to the sales orientation). The so-called production era is thought to have dominated marketing practice from the 1860s to the 1930s, but other theorists argue that evidence of the production orientation can still be found in some companies or industries. Specifically, Kotler and Armstrong note that the production philosophy is "one of the oldest philosophies that guides sellers... [and] is still useful in some situations."[38]
Marketing
Further information: Market orientation

The marketing orientation is the most common orientation used in contemporary marketing. It is a customer-centric approach that involves a firm basing its marketing program around products that suit new consumer tastes. Firms adopting a marketing orientation typically engage in extensive market research to gauge consumer desires, use R&D (Research & Development) to develop a product attuned to the revealed information, and then utilize promotion techniques to ensure consumers are aware of the product's existence and the benefits it can deliver.[39] Scales designed to measure a firm's overall market orientation have been developed and found to be robust in a variety of contexts.[40]

The marketing orientation has three prime facets, which are:

    Customer orientation: A firm in the market economy can survive by producing goods that people are willing and able to buy. Consequently, ascertaining consumer demand is vital for a firm's future viability and even existence as a going concern.
    Organizational orientation: The marketing department is of prime importance within the functional level of an organization. Information from the marketing department is used to guide the actions of a company's other departments.
    As an example, a marketing department could ascertain (via marketing research) that consumers desired a new type of product, or a new usage for an existing product. With this in mind, the marketing department would inform the R&D department to create a prototype of a product/service based on consumers' new desires.
    The production department would then start to manufacture the product, while the marketing department would focus on the promotion, distribution, pricing, etc. of the product. Additionally, a firm's finance department would be consulted, with respect to securing appropriate funding for the development, production and promotion of the product. Finance may oppose the required capital expenditure since it could undermine a healthy cash flow for the organization.
    Mutually beneficial exchange: In a transaction in the market economy, a firm gains revenue, which thus leads to more profits, market shares, or sales. A consumer, on the other hand, gains the satisfaction of a need/want, utility, reliability, and value for money from the purchase of a product or service.

Societal marketing
Main article: Societal marketing

A number of scholars and practitioners have argued that marketers have a greater social responsibility than simply satisfying customers and providing them with superior value. Marketing organizations that have embraced the societal marketing concept typically identify key stakeholder groups such as employees, customers, and local communities. Companies that adopt a societal marketing perspective typically practice triple bottom line reporting whereby they publish social impact and environmental impact reports alongside financial performance reports. Sustainable marketing or green marketing is an extension of societal marketing.[41]
The Marketing Mix
Main article: Marketing mix

A marketing mix is a foundational tool used to guide decision making in marketing. The marketing mix represents the basic tools that marketers can use to bring their products or services to the market. They are the foundation of managerial marketing and the marketing plan typically devotes a section to the marketing mix.
The 4Ps

The traditional marketing mix refers to four broad levels of marketing decision, namely: product, price, promotion, and place.[6][42]
The 4Ps of the marketing mix stand for product, price, place and promotion
One version of the marketing mix is the 4Ps method.
Outline

Product
    The product aspects of marketing deal with the specifications of the actual goods or services, and how it relates to the end-user's needs and wants. The product element consists of product design, new product innovation, branding, packaging, labeling. The scope of a product generally includes supporting elements such as warranties, guarantees, and support. Branding, a key aspect of the product management, refers to the various methods of communicating a brand identity for the product, brand, or company. [43]
Pricing
    This refers to the process of setting a price for a product, including discounts. The price need not be monetary; it can simply be what is exchanged for the product or services, e.g. time, energy, or attention or any sacrifices consumers make in order to acquire a product or service. The price is the cost that a consumer pays for a product—monetary or not. Methods of setting prices are in the domain of pricing science. [44]
Place (or distribution)
    This refers to how the product gets to the customer; the distribution channels and intermediaries such as wholesalers and retailers who enable customers to access products or services in a convenient manner. This third P has also sometimes been called Place or Placement, referring to the channel by which a product or service is sold (e.g. online vs. retail), which geographic region or industry, to which segment (young adults, families, business people), etc. also referring to how the environment in which the product is sold in can affect sales. [44]
Promotion
    This includes all aspects of marketing communications; advertising, sales promotion, including promotional education, public relations, personal selling, product placement, branded entertainment, event marketing, trade shows and exhibitions. This fourth P is focused on providing a message to get a response from consumers. The message is designed to persuade or tell a story to create awareness.[44]

Criticisms

One of the limitations of the 4Ps approach is its emphasis of an inside out-view. [45] An inside-out approach is the traditional planning approach where the organisation identifies its desired goals and objectives, which are often based around what has always been done. Marketing's task then becomes one of "selling" the organization's products and messages to the "outside" or external stakeholders.[43] In contrast, an outside-in approach first seeks to understand the needs and wants of the consumer.[46]

From a model-building perspective, the 4 Ps has attracted a number of criticisms. Well-designed models should exhibit clearly defined categories that are mutually exclusive, with no overlap. Yet, the 4 Ps model has extensive overlapping problems. Several authors stress the hybrid nature of the fourth P, mentioning the presence of two important dimensions, "communication" (general and informative communications such as public relations and corporate communications) and "promotion" (persuasive communications such as advertising and direct selling). Certain marketing activities, such as personal selling, may be classified as either promotion or as part of the place (i.e., distribution) element.[47] Some pricing tactics, such as promotional pricing, can be classified as price variables or promotional variables and, therefore, also exhibit some overlap.

Other important criticisms include that the marketing mix lacks a strategic framework and is, therefore, unfit to be a planning instrument, particularly when uncontrollable, external elements are an important aspect of the marketing environment.[48]
Modifications and extensions

To overcome the deficiencies of the 4P model, some authors have suggested extensions or modifications to the original model. Extensions of the four P's are often included in cases such as services marketing where unique characteristics (i.e. intangibility, perishability, heterogeneity and the inseparability of production and consumption) warrant additional consideration factors. Other extensions have been found necessary for retail marketing, industrial marketing, and internet marketing

include "people", "process", and "physical evidence" and are often applied in the case of services marketing[49] Other extensions have been found necessary in retail marketing, industrial marketing and internet marketing.

    Physical- the environment customers are in when they are marketed to
    People- service personnel and other customers with whom customers interact with. These people form part of the overall service experience.
    Process- the way in which orders are handled, customers are satisfied and the service is delivered[50]
    Physical Evidence- the tangible examples of marketing that the customer has encountered before buying the advertised product
    Productivity- the ability to provide consumers with quality product using as few resources as possible[51]

The 4Cs

In response to environmental and technological changes in marketing, as well as criticisms towards the 4Ps approach, the 4Cs has emerged as a modern marketing mix model.
Outline

Consumer (or Client)

The consumer refers to the person or group that will acquire the product. This aspect of the model focuses on fulfilling the wants or needs of the consumer. [7]

Cost

Cost refers to what is exchanged in return for the product. Cost mainly consists of the monetary value of the product. Cost also refers to anything else the consumer must sacrifice to attain the product, such as time or money spent on transportation to acquire the product. [7]

Convenience

Like "Place" in the 4Ps model, convenience refers to where the product will be sold. This, however, not only refers to physical stores but also whether the product is available in person or online. The convenience aspect emphasizes making it as easy as possible for the consumer to attain the product, thus making them more likely to do so. [7]

Communication

Like "Promotion" in the 4Ps model, communication refers to how consumers find out about a product. Unlike, promotion, communication not only refers to the one-way communication of advertising, but also the two-way communication available through social media. [7]
Environment
Main article: Market environment

The term "marketing environment" relates to all of the factors (whether internal, external, direct or indirect) that affect a firm's marketing decision-making/planning. A firm's marketing environment consists of three main areas, which are:

    The macro-environment, over which a firm holds little control
    The micro-environment, over which a firm holds a greater amount (though not necessarily total) control
    The internal environment, which includes the factors inside of the company itself[8]

Macro
Main article: Macromarketing

A firm's marketing macro-environment consists of a variety of external factors that manifest on a large (or macro) scale. These include factors that are:

    economic
    social
    political
    technological

A common method of assessing a firm's macro-environment is via a PESTLE (Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Legal, Ecological) analysis. Within a PESTLE analysis, a firm would analyze national political issues, culture and climate, key macroeconomic conditions, health and indicators (such as economic growth, inflation, unemployment, etc.), social trends/attitudes, and the nature of technology's impact on its society and the business processes within the society. [8]
Micro

A firm's micro-environment comprises factors pertinent to the firm itself, or stakeholders closely connected with the firm or company.

A firm's micro-environment typically spans:

    Customers/consumers
    Employees
    Suppliers
    The Media

In contrast to the macro-environment, an organization holds a greater (though not complete) degree of control over these factors.[8]
Internal

A firms internal environment consists of factors inside of the actual company. These are factors controlled by the firm and they affect the relationship that a firm has with its customers. These include factors such as:

    Labor
    Inventory
    Company Policy
    Logistics
    Budget
    Capital Assets [8]

Research
Main article: Marketing research

Marketing research is a systematic process of analyzing data that involves conducting research to support marketing activities and the statistical interpretation of data into information. This information is then used by managers to plan marketing activities, gauge the nature of a firm's marketing environment and to attain information from suppliers. A distinction should be made between marketing research and market research. Market research involves gathering information about a particular target market. As an example, a firm may conduct research in a target market, after selecting a suitable market segment. In contrast, marketing research relates to all research conducted within marketing. Market research is a subset of marketing research.

Marketing researchers use statistical methods (such as quantitative research, qualitative research, hypothesis tests, Chi-square tests, linear regression, correlation coefficients, frequency distributions, Poisson and binomial distributions, etc.) to interpret their findings and convert data into information.[52]

The stages of research include:

    Define the problem
    Plan research
    Research
    Interpret data
    Implement findings [9]

Segmentation
Main article: Market segmentation

Market segmentation consists of taking the total heterogeneous market for a product and dividing it into several sub-markets or segments, each of which tends to be homogeneous in all significant aspects.[10] The process is conducted for two main purposes: better allocation of a firm's finite resources and to better serve the more diversified tastes of contemporary consumers. A firm only possesses a certain amount of resources. Thus, it must make choices (and appreciate the related costs) in servicing specific groups of consumers. Moreover, with more diversity in the tastes of modern consumers, firms are noting the benefit of servicing a multiplicity of new markets.

Market segmentation can be defined in terms of the STP acronym, meaning Segment, Target, and Position.

Segmentation involves the initial splitting up of consumers into persons of like needs/wants/tastes. Commonly used criteria include:

    Geographic (such as a country, region, city, town)
    Psychographic (e.g. personality traits or lifestyle traits which influence consumer behaviour)
    Demographic (e.g. age, gender, socio-economic class, education)
    Gender
    Income
    Life-Cycle (e.g. Baby Boomer, Generation X, Millennial, Generation Z)
    Lifestyle (e.g. tech savvy, active)
    Behavioural (e.g. brand loyalty, usage rate) [53]

Once a segment has been identified to target, a firm must ascertain whether the segment is beneficial for them to service. The DAMP acronym is used as criteria to gauge the viability of a target market. The elements of DAMP are:

    Discernable – how a segment can be differentiated from other segments.
    Accessible – how a segment can be accessed via Marketing Communications produced by a firm
    Measurable – can the segment be quantified and its size determined?
    Profitable – can a sufficient return on investment be attained from a segment's servicing?

The next step in the targeting process is the level of differentiation involved in a segment serving. Three modes of differentiation exist, which are commonly applied by firms. These are:

    Undifferentiated – where a company produces a like product for all of a market segment
    Differentiated – in which a firm produced slight modifications of a product within a segment
    Niche – in which an organization forges a product to satisfy a specialized target market

Positioning concerns how to position a product in the minds of consumers and inform what attributes differentiate it from the competitor's products. A firm often performs this by producing a perceptual map, which denotes similar products produced in the same industry according to how consumers perceive their price and quality. From a product's placing on the map, a firm would tailor its marketing communications to meld with the product's perception among consumers and its position among competitors' offering. [54]
Promotional Mix
See also: Integrated marketing communications and Promotional mix

The promotional mix outlines how a company will market its product. It consists of five tools: personal selling, sales promotion, public relations, advertising and social media
Personal selling
Main article: Personal selling

Personal selling involves an oral presentation given by a salesperson who approaches an individual or a group of potential customers. Personal selling allows for two-way communication and relationship building that can aid both the buyer and the seller in their goals. Personal selling is most commonly seen in business-to-business marketing (e.g.: selling machinery to a factory, selling paper to a print shop), but it can also be found in business-to-consumer marketing (e.g.: selling cars at a dealership). [4]
Female beer sellers warn the photographer that he also has to buy some, Tireli market, Mali 1989
Sales promotion
Main article: Sales promotion

Sales promotion involves short-term incentives to encourage the buying of products. Examples of these incentives include:

    free samples
    contests
    premiums
    trade shows
    giveaways
    coupons
    sweepstakes
    games

Depending on the incentive, one or more of the other elements of the promotional mix may be used in conjunction with sales promotion to inform customers of the incentives. [4]
Public relations
Main article: Public relations

Public relations is the use of media tools to promote a positive view of a company or product in the public's eye. Public relations monitors the public opinion of a company or product and generates publicity to either sustain a positive opinion or lessen or change a negative opinion.

Public relations can include interviews, speeches/presentations, corporate literature, social media, news releases and special events. [4]
Advertising
Main article: advertising

Advertising occurs when a firm directly pays a media channel to publicize its product. Common examples of advertising include:

    TV commercials
    Radio commercials
    Radio ads
    Magazine ads
    Online ads
    Billboards
    Event sponsorship
    Direct mail ads
    Transit ads [4]

Social Media
Main article: Social media marketing

Social media is used to facilitate two-way communication between companies and their customers. Social media outlets such as Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest, Snapchat and YouTube allow brands to start a conversation with regular and prospective customers. Viral marketing can be greatly facilitated by social media and if successful, allows key marketing messages and content in reaching a large number of target audiences within a short time frame. Additionally, social media platforms can also house advertising and public relations content..[4]
The Marketing Plan
Main article: Marketing plan

The area of marketing planning involves forging a plan for a firm's marketing activities. A marketing plan can also pertain to a specific product, as well as to an organization's overall marketing strategy. An organization's marketing planning process is derived from its overall business strategy. Thus, when top management are devising the firm's strategic direction/mission, the intended marketing activities are incorporated into this plan.
Process

Within the overall strategic marketing plan, the stages of the process are listed as thus:

    Mission Statement
    SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats) Analysis
    Marketing Objectives
    Targeted Marketing Strategy
    Marketing Mix
    Implementation [4]

Levels of marketing objectives within an organization

As stated previously, the senior management of a firm would formulate a general business strategy for a firm. However, this general business strategy would be interpreted and implemented in different contexts throughout the firm.

At the corporate level, marketing objectives are typically broad-based in nature, and pertain to the general vision of the firm in the short, medium or long-term. As an example, if one pictures a group of companies (or a conglomerate), top management may state that sales for the group should increase by 25% over a ten-year period.

A strategic business unit (SBU) is a subsidiary within a firm, which participates within a given market/industry. The SBU would embrace the corporate strategy, and attune it to its own particular industry. For instance, an SBU may partake in the sports goods industry. It thus would ascertain how it would attain additional sales of sports goods, in order to satisfy the overall business strategy.

The functional level relates to departments within the SBUs, such as marketing, finance, HR, production, etc. The functional level would adopt the SBU's strategy and determine how to accomplish the SBU's own objectives in its market. To use the example of the sports goods industry again, the marketing department would draw up marketing plans, strategies and communications to help the SBU achieve its marketing aims.
Product life cycle
Further information: Product life-cycle management (marketing)
Product lifecycle

The product life cycle (PLC) is a tool used by marketing managers to gauge the progress of a product, especially relating to sales or revenue accrued over time. The PLC is based on a few key assumptions, including:

    A given product would possess introduction, growth, maturity, and decline stage
    No product lasts perpetually on the market
    A firm must employ differing strategies, according to where a product is on the PLC

In the introduction stage, a product is launched onto the market. To stimulate the growth of sales/revenue, use of advertising may be high, in order to heighten awareness of the product in question.

During the growth stage, the product's sales/revenue is increasing, which may stimulate more marketing communications to sustain sales. More entrants enter into the market, to reap the apparent high profits that the industry is producing.

When the product hits maturity, its starts to level off, and an increasing number of entrants to a market produce price falls for the product. Firms may use sales promotions to raise sales.

During decline, demand for a good begins to taper off, and the firm may opt to discontinue the manufacture of the product. This is so, if revenue for the product comes from efficiency savings in production, over actual sales of a good/service. However, if a product services a niche market, or is complementary to another product, it may continue the manufacture of the product, despite a low level of sales/revenue being accrued. [4]
See also
Main article: Outline of marketing

    Account-based marketing
    Advertising
        History of advertising
        Sex in Advertising
    Advertising management
    Affinity marketing
    American business history
    Brand awareness
    Consumer confusion
    Consumer behaviour
    Database marketing
    Demand chain
    Digital marketing
    Email remarketing
    Family in advertising
    History of marketing
    List of marketing terms
    Loyalty marketing
    Macromarketing
    Marketing management
    Marketing mix
    Marketing science
    Marketing strategy
    Micromarketing
    Media manipulation
    Multicultural marketing
    Product management
    Product marketing
    Production orientation
    Public Sector Marketing
    Real-time marketing
    Return on marketing investment (ROMI)
    Relationship marketing
    Smarketing
    Societal marketing
    Sustainable market orientation
    Visual marketing

Types of marketing

    Agricultural marketing
    Business marketing and industrial marketing
    Destination marketing
    Global marketing
    Influencer marketing
    Relationship marketing
    Services marketing
    Social marketing

Marketing orientations or philosophies

    Marketing orientation
    Production orientation
    Selling orientation
    Socially responsible marketing and corporate social responsibility
    Relationship marketing and customer relationship management

References

Hunt, Shelby D. (July 1976). "The Nature and Scope of Marketing". Journal of Marketing. 40 (3): 17–28. doi:10.2307/1249990. JSTOR 1249990.
Bagozzi, Richard P. (October 1975). "Marketing as Exchange". Journal of Marketing. 39 (4): 32–39. doi:10.2307/1250593. JSTOR 1250593.
Drucker, Peter (1954). The Practice of Management. New York: Harper & Row. p. 32.
Lamb, Charles; Hair, Joseph; McDaniel, Carl (2016). Principles of Marketing. Boston, MA: Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-1-285-86014-5.
Mc Namara (1972) cited in Deshpande, R., Developing a Market Orientation, Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage, 1999, p. 11
McCarthy, Jerome E. (1964). Basic Marketing. A Managerial Approach. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Hester, Brittany (9 April 2019). "Marketing Strategy: Forget the 4 P'S! What are the 4 C'S?". CATMEDIA Internal Communication. Retrieved 8 November 2019.
"What is Marketing Environment? definition and meaning – Business Jargons". Business Jargons. 25 August 2015. Retrieved 8 November 2017.
"The Marketing Research Process | Principles of Marketing". courses.lumenlearning.com. Retrieved 15 November 2019.
Stanton, William J (1984). Fundamentals of marketing. McGraw-Hill.
Marketing definition approved in October 2007 by the American Marketing Association: [1] Archived 9 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Paul H. Selden (1997). Sales Process Engineering: A Personal Workshop. Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press. p. 23.
"University Of York Introduction To Marketing" (PDF). Retrieved 10 October 2019.
"Marketing library resources – content, knowledge databases". CIM. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Paliwoda, Stanley J.; Ryans, John K. (2008). "Back to first principles". International Marketing – Modern and Classic Papers (1st ed.). p. 25. ISBN 978-1-84376-649-0. Retrieved 15 October 2009.
2.0, Women. "The Science Of Marketing". Forbes. Retrieved 16 June 2017.
"Best Masters of Science (MScs) in Marketing 2017/2018". www.masterstudies.com. Retrieved 27 September 2017.
"10 Steps to Creating a Marketing Plan for Your Small Business". Dummies. Retrieved 27 September 2017.
Subin, Im (2004). Market Orientation, Creativity, and New Product Performance in High-Technology Firms. Journal of Marketing. pp. 114–132.
NetMBA.com. "Marketing Concept". www.netmba.com. Retrieved 8 November 2017.
Weeks, Richard; Marx, William (Autumn 1968). "The Market Concept: Problems and Promises". Business & Society. 9: 39–42. doi:10.1177/000765036800900106.
Hague, Paul N.; Hague, Nicholas; Morgan, Carol-Ann (2013). Market Research in Practice: How to Get Greater Insight From Your Market. London: Kogan-Page. pp. 19–20.
Smith, W.R. (July 1956). "Product Differentiation and Market Segmentation as Alternative Marketing Strategies" (PDF). Journal of Marketing. 21 (1): 3–8. doi:10.1177/002224295602100102.
"What Comes Next? Survey Analysis and Segmentation", Discover the Future of Research, Wiley, 12 January 2017
Ahmad, Rizal (May 2003). "Benefit segmentation". International Journal of Market Research. 45 (3): 1–13. doi:10.1177/147078530304500302. ISSN 1470-7853.
du Plessis, D.F. Introduction to Public Relations and Advertising. p. 134.
Business News Daily Editor, Exp. "What is B2C?". Business News Daily. Retrieved 16 April 2020.
Tarver, Evan. "Customer to Customer – C2C". Investopedia. Retrieved 16 April 2020.
Kohli, A.K. and Jaworski, B.J., "Market Orientation: The Construct, Research Propositions, and Managerial Implications," Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, April 1990, pp. 1–18
Narver, J.C.; Slater, S.F. "The Effect of a Market Orientation on Business Profitability". Journal of Marketing. 54 (4): 20–34. doi:10.2307/1251757.
Hollander, S.C.; Jones, D.G.B.; Dix, L. "Periodization in Marketing History". Journal of Macromarketing. 25 (1): 33–39. doi:10.1177/0276146705274982.
Fillis, Ian (2006). "Art for Art's Sake or Art for Business Sake: An exploration of artistic product orientation". The Marketing Review. 6: 29–40. doi:10.1362/146934706776861573.
Sheth, J., Sisodia, R.S. and Sharma, A., "The Antecedents and Consequences of Customer-Centric Marketing," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 28, No. 1, 2000, p. 55
Kotler, Philip (1980). Principles of Marketing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc.
Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Principles of Marketing, 12th ed., Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education, 2008, p. 29
Avlonitis, G.J. and Gounaris, S.P., "Marketing Orientation and Company Performance: Industrial vs. Consumer Goods Companies," Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 26, 1997, pp. 385–402
Verbeke, Willem; Dietz, Bart; Verwaal, Ernst (2010). "Drivers of sales performance: A contemporary meta-analysis. Have salespeople become knowledge brokers?" (PDF). Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science. 39 (3): 407–28. doi:10.1007/s11747-010-0211-8.
Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Principles of Marketing, 12th ed., Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education, 2008, p. 28
McGee, L.W. and Spiro, R.L., "The Marketing Concept in Perspective," Business Horizons, May–June 1988, pp. 40–45
Hooley, G., Fahy, J., Beracs, J., Fonfara, K. and Snoj, B., "Market Orientation in the Transition Economies of Central Europe: Tests of the Narver and Slater Market Orientation Scales," Journal of Business Research, Vol. 50, 2000, pp. 273–85. Note that the most widely applied scale is that developed by Narver and Slater in Narver, J.C., and Slater, S.F., The Effect of Marketing Orientation on Business Profitability," Journal of Marketing, Vo. 54, 1990, pp. 20–35
, Blackwell Reference, Kotler, P., "What consumerism means for marketers", Harvard Business Review, vol. 50, no. 3, 1972, pp. 48–57; Wilkie, W.L. and Moore, E.S., "Macromarketing as a Pillar of Marketing Thought," Journal of Macromarketing, Vol. 26 No. 2, December 2006, pp. 224–32 doi:10.1177/0276146706291067; Wilkie, W.L. and Moore, E.S., "Scholarly Research in Marketing: Exploring the "4 Eras" of Thought Development," Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2003, pp. 116–46
Grönroos, Christian. "From Marketing Mix to Relationship Marketing: Towards a Paradigm Shift in Marketing," Management Decision, vol. 32, no. 2, 1994, pp. 4–20.
Kerr, F., Patti, C. and Ichul, K., "An Inside-out Approach to Integrated Marketing Communications: An International Perspective," International Journal of Advertising, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2008, pp. 531–40
Borden, N., "The Concept of the Marketing Mix," Journal of Advertising Research, June 1964 pp. 2–7; van Waterschoot, W. and van den Bulte, C., "The 4P Classification of the Marketing Mix Revisited," Journal of Marketing, Vol. 56, No. 4, 1992, pp. 83–93
Gareth, Morgan (1988). Riding the Waves of Change. Jossey-Bass. ISBN 978-1555420932.
Porcu, L., del Barrio-Garcia, S., and Kitchen, P.J., "How Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC) works? A theoretical review and an analysis of its main drivers and effects/ ¿Cómo funciona la Comunicación Integrada de Marketing (CIM)? Una revisión teórica y un análisis de sus antecedents Efectos," Comunicación y Sociedad, Vol. XXV, Núm. 1, 2012, pp. 313–48
van Waterschoot, W.; van den Bulte, C. "The 4P Classification of the Marketing Mix Revisited". Journal of Marketing. 56 (4): 83–93. doi:10.2307/1251988.
Constantinides, E., "The Marketing Mix Revisited: Towards the 21st Century Marketing," Journal of Marketing Management, Vo. 22, 2006, pp. 407–38
Fisk, R.P., Brown, W., and Bitner, M.J., "Tracking the Evolution of Services Marketing Literature, Journal of Retailing, vol. 41 (April), 1993; Booms, B. and Bitner, M.J. "Marketing Strategies and Organizational Structures for Service Firms" in James H. Donnelly and William R. George (eds), Marketing of Services, Chicago: American Marketing Association, 47–51; Rafiq,M. and Ahmed, P.K. "Using the 7Ps as a Generic Marketing mix: An Exploratory Survey of UK and European Marketing Academics", Marketing Intelligence & Planning, Vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 4–15
tutor2u (1 November 2019). "Extended Marketing Mix (7P's)". tutor2u. Retrieved 8 November 2019.
"Marketing Mix – 4 Ps or 8 Ps?". www.business-achievers.com. Retrieved 8 November 2019.
"4 Principles Of Marketing As A Science". Search Engine Land. 18 April 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2017.
Moore, Karl; Pareek, Niketh (2010). Marketing: the Basics. New York, NY: Routledge. pp. 38–65. ISBN 978-0-415-77899-2.

    Moutinho, Luiz (2000). Strategic Management in Tourism. New York, NY: CABI Publishing. pp. 121–166.

Bibliography

    Bartels, Robert, The History of Marketing Thought," Columbus, Ohio, Grid, (1976) 1988 online
    Christensen, Clayton M. (1997). The innovator's dilemma: when new technologies cause great firms to fail. Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Harvard Business School Press. ISBN 978-0-87584-585-2.
    Church, Roy and Godley, Andrew (eds), The Emergence of Modern Marketing, London, Frank Cass, 2003 online edition
    Hollander, Stanley C., Rassuli, Kathleen M.; Jones, D.G. Brian; Dix and Farlow, L., "Periodization in Marketing History," Journal of Macromarketing, Vol 25, no.1, 2005, pp. 32–41. online
    Tedlow, Richard S., and Jones, Geoffrey G. (eds), The Rise and Fall of Mass Marketing, Routledge, 2014
    Weitz, Barton A. and Robin Wensley (eds). Handbook of Marketing, 2002

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marketing.
Library resources about
Marketing

    Resources in your library

    The dictionary definition of marketing at Wiktionary
    Quotations related to marketing at Wikiquote
    Marketing at Wikibooks

    vte

Media manipulation
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	

    GND: 4037589-4 HDS: 014187 LCCN: sh85081333 NARA: 10637615 NDL: 00567413

Categories:

    MarketingPromotion and marketing communications

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    View source
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikibooks
    Wikiquote

Print/export

    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    Afrikaans
    العربية
    Aragonés
    Asturianu
    Azərbaycanca
    বাংলা
    Bân-lâm-gú
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    Български
    Boarisch
    Bosanski
    Català
    Čeština
    Corsu
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Deutsch
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Español
    Esperanto
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Français
    Frysk
    Gaeilge
    Galego
    ગુજરાતી
    한국어
    Հայերեն
    हिन्दी
    Hrvatski
    Ido
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Italiano
    עברית
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    ქართული
    Қазақша
    Кыргызча
    Latviešu
    Lietuvių
    Magyar
    Македонски
    മലയാളം
    मराठी
    Bahasa Melayu
    Монгол
    မြန်မာဘာသာ
    Nederlands
    नेपाली
    नेपाल भाषा
    日本語
    Norsk bokmål
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    پښتو
    Patois
    Polski
    Português
    Română
    Русский
    Саха тыла
    Sardu
    Scots
    Shqip
    Sicilianu
    සිංහල
    Simple English
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Suomi
    Svenska
    Tagalog
    தமிழ்
    తెలుగు
    ไทย
    Türkçe
    Türkmençe
    Українська
    اردو
    Vèneto
    Tiếng Việt
    Walon
    吴语
    ייִדיש
    粵語
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 14 May 2020, at 01:04 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki



Business administration
Management of a business
Accounting
Business entities
Corporate governance
Corporate law
Corporate title
Economics
Finance
Types of management
Organization
Trade

    Emblem-money.svg Business and economics portal

    vte

Part of a series on
Capitalism
Concepts
Economic systems
Economic theories
Origins
Development
People
Related topics
Ideologies

    Capitalismlogo.svg Capitalism portal
    Emblem-money.svg Business portal
    Socrates.png Philosophy portal
    A coloured voting box.svg Politics portal
    Bills and coins.svg Money portal

    vte

Business is the activity of making one's living or making money by producing or buying and selling products (such as goods and services).[1][2][need quotation to verify][3][4] Simply put, it is "any activity or enterprise entered into for profit. It does not mean it is a company, a corporation, partnership, or have any such formal organization, but it can range from a street peddler to General Motors."[5]

Having a business name does not separate the business entity from the owner, which means that the owner of the business is responsible and liable for debts incurred by the business. If the business acquires debts, the creditors can go after the owner's personal possessions. A business structure does not allow for corporate tax rates. The proprietor is personally taxed on all income from the business.

The term is also often used colloquially (but not by lawyers or by public officials) to refer to a company. A company, on the other hand, is a separate legal entity and provides for limited liability, as well as corporate tax rates. A company structure is more complicated and expensive to set up, but offers more protection and benefits for the owner.
Contents

    1 Forms
    2 Classifications
    3 Activities
        3.1 Accounting
        3.2 Finance
        3.3 Manufacturing
        3.4 Marketing
        3.5 Research and development
        3.6 Safety
        3.7 Sales
    4 Management
        4.1 Restructuring state enterprises
    5 Organization and regulation
        5.1 Commercial law
        5.2 Capital
        5.3 Intellectual property
        5.4 Trade union
    6 See also
    7 References
    8 External links

Forms
Main article: List of business entities

Forms of business ownership vary by jurisdiction, but several common entities exist:

    Sole proprietorship: A sole proprietorship, also known as a sole trader, is owned by one person and operates for their benefit. The owner operates the business alone and may hire employees. A sole proprietor has unlimited liability for all obligations incurred by the business, whether from operating costs or judgments against the business. All assets of the business belong to a sole proprietor, including, for example, a computer infrastructure, any inventory, manufacturing equipment, or retail fixtures, as well as any real property owned by the sole proprietor.
    Partnership: A partnership is a business owned by two or more people. In most forms of partnerships, each partner has unlimited liability for the debts incurred by the business. The three most prevalent types of for-profit partnerships are general partnerships, limited partnerships, and limited liability partnerships.[6]
    Corporation: The owners of a corporation have limited liability and the business has a separate legal personality from its owners. Corporations can be either government-owned or privately owned, and they can organize either for profit or as nonprofit organizations. A privately owned, for-profit corporation is owned by its shareholders, who elect a board of directors to direct the corporation and hire its managerial staff. A privately owned, for-profit corporation can be either privately held by a small group of individuals, or publicly held, with publicly traded shares listed on a stock exchange.
    Cooperative: Often referred to as a "co-op", a cooperative is a limited-liability business that can organize as for-profit or not-for-profit. A cooperative differs from a corporation in that it has members, not shareholders, and they share decision-making authority. Cooperatives are typically classified as either consumer cooperatives or worker cooperatives. Cooperatives are fundamental to the ideology of economic democracy.
    Limited liability companies (LLC), limited liability partnerships, and other specific types of business organization protect their owners or shareholders from business failure by doing business under a separate legal entity with certain legal protections. In contrast, unincorporated businesses or persons working on their own are usually not as protected.[7][8]
    Franchises: A franchise is a system in which entrepreneurs purchase the rights to open and run a business from a larger corporation.[9] Franchising in the United States is widespread and is a major economic powerhouse. One out of twelve retail businesses in the United States are franchised and 8 million people are employed in a franchised business.[10]
    A company limited by guarantee: Commonly used where companies are formed for non-commercial purposes, such as clubs or charities. The members guarantee the payment of certain (usually nominal) amounts if the company goes into insolvent liquidation, but otherwise, they have no economic rights in relation to the company. This type of company is common in England. A company limited by guarantee may be with or without having share capital.
    A company limited by shares: The most common form of the company used for business ventures. Specifically, a limited company is a "company in which the liability of each shareholder is limited to the amount individually invested" with corporations being "the most common example of a limited company."[11] This type of company is common in England and many English-speaking countries. A company limited by shares may be a
        publicly traded company or a
        privately held company
    A company limited by guarantee with a share capital: A hybrid entity, usually used where the company is formed for non-commercial purposes, but the activities of the company are partly funded by investors who expect a return. This type of company may no longer be formed in the UK, although provisions still exist in law for them to exist.[12]
    A limited liability company: "A company—statutorily authorized in certain states—that is characterized by limited liability, management by members or managers, and limitations on ownership transfer", i.e., L.L.C.[11] LLC structure has been called "hybrid" in that it "combines the characteristics of a corporation and of a partnership or sole proprietorship". Like a corporation, it has limited liability for members of the company, and like a partnership, it has "flow-through taxation to the members" and must be "dissolved upon the death or bankruptcy of a member".[13]
    An unlimited company with or without a share capital: A hybrid entity, a company where the liability of members or shareholders for the debts (if any) of the company are not limited. In this case, the doctrine of a veil of incorporation does not apply.

Less common types of companies are:

    Companies formed by letters patent: Most corporations by letters patent are corporations sole and not companies as the term is commonly understood today.
    Charter corporations: Before the passing of modern companies legislation, these were the only types of companies. Now they are relatively rare, except for very old companies that still survive (of which there are still many, particularly many British banks), or modern societies that fulfill a quasi-regulatory function (for example, the Bank of England is a corporation formed by a modern charter).
    Statutory companies: Relatively rare today, certain companies have been formed by a private statute passed in the relevant jurisdiction.

Note that "Ltd after the company's name signifies limited company, and PLC (public limited company) indicates that its shares are widely held."[14]

In legal parlance, the owners of a company are normally referred to as the "members". In a company limited or unlimited by shares (formed or incorporated with a share capital), this will be the shareholders. In a company limited by guarantee, this will be the guarantors. Some offshore jurisdictions have created special forms of offshore company in a bid to attract business for their jurisdictions. Examples include "segregated portfolio companies" and restricted purpose companies.

There are, however, many, many sub-categories of types of company that can be formed in various jurisdictions in the world.

Companies are also sometimes distinguished into public companies and private companies for legal and regulatory purposes. Public companies are companies whose shares can be publicly traded, often (although not always) on a stock exchange which imposes listing requirements/Listing Rules as to the issued shares, the trading of shares and a future issue of shares to help bolster the reputation of the exchange or particular market of exchange. Private companies do not have publicly traded shares, and often contain restrictions on transfers of shares. In some jurisdictions, private companies have maximum numbers of shareholders.

A parent company is a company that owns enough voting stock in another firm to control management and operations by influencing or electing its board of directors; the second company being deemed as a subsidiary of the parent company. The definition of a parent company differs by jurisdiction, with the definition normally being defined by way of laws dealing with companies in that jurisdiction.
Classifications
Main article: Industry classification

    Agriculture, such as the domestication of fish, animals, and livestock, as well as lumber, oil and mining businesses that extract natural resources and raw materials, such as wood, petroleum, natural gas, ores, plants or minerals.
    Financial services businesses include banks, brokerage firms, credit unions, credit cards, insurance companies, asset and investment companies such as private equity firms, private equity funds, real estate investment trusts, sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, mutual funds, index funds, and hedge funds, stock exchanges, and other companies that generate profits through investment and management of capital.
    Entertainment companies and mass media agencies generate profits primarily from the sale of intellectual property. They include film studios and production houses, mass media companies such as cable television networks, online digital media agencies, talent agencies, mobile media outlets, newspapers, book and magazine publishing houses.
    Industrial manufacturers produce products, either from raw materials or from component parts, then export the finished products at a profit. They include tangible goods such as cars, buses, medical devices, glass, or aircraft.
    Real estate businesses sell, invest, construct and develop properties, including land, residential homes, and other buildings.
    Retailers, wholesalers, and distributors act as middlemen and get goods produced by manufacturers to the intended consumers; they make their profits by marking up their prices. Most stores and catalog companies are distributors or retailers.
    Transportation businesses such as railways, airlines, shipping companies that deliver goods and individuals to their destinations for a fee.
    Sports organizations are involved in producing, facilitating, promoting, or organizing any activity, experience, or business enterprise focused on sports. They make their profits by selling goods and services that are sports related.
    Utilities produce public services such as water, electricity, waste management or sewage treatment. These industries are usually operated under the charge of a public government.
    Service businesses offer intangible goods or services and typically charge for labor or other services provided to government, to consumers, or to other businesses. Interior decorators, beauticians, hair stylists, make-up artists, tanning salons, laundromats, dry cleaners, and pest controllers are service businesses.

Activities
Accounting
Main article: Accounting

Accounting is the measurement, processing, and communication of financial information about economic entities[15][16] such as businesses and corporations. The modern field was established by the Italian mathematician Luca Pacioli in 1494.[17] Accounting, which has been called the "language of business",[18] measures the results of an organization's economic activities and conveys this information to a variety of users, including investors, creditors, management, and regulators.[19] Practitioners of accounting are known as accountants. The terms "accounting" and "financial reporting" are often used as synonyms.
Finance
Main article: Finance

Finance is a field that deals with the study of investments. It includes the dynamics of assets and liabilities over time under conditions of different degrees of uncertainty and risk. Finance can also be defined as the science of money management. Finance aims to price assets based on their risk level and their expected rate of return. Finance can be broken into three different sub categories: public finance, corporate finance, and personal finance.Activities also include budgeting, forecasting and lending money, and is defined as the management of money.[20]
Manufacturing
Main article: Manufacturing

Manufacturing is the production of merchandise for use or sale using labour and machines, tools, chemical and biological processing, or formulation. The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale.
Marketing
Main article: Marketing

Marketing is defined by the American Marketing Association as "the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large."[21] The term developed from the original meaning which referred literally to going to a market to buy or sell goods or services. Marketing tactics include advertising as well as determining product pricing.

With the rise in technology, marketing is further divided into a class called digital marketing. It is marketing products and services using digital technologies.
Research and development
Main article: Research and development

Research and development refer to activities in connection with corporate or government innovation. Research and development constitute the first stage of development of a potential new service or product. Research and development are very difficult to manage since the defining feature of the research is that the researchers do not know in advance exactly how to accomplish the desired result.[citation needed]
Safety
Main article: Safety

Injuries cost businesses billions of dollars annually.[22] Studies have shown how company acceptance and implementation of comprehensive safety and health management systems reduce incidents, insurance costs, and workers' compensation claims.[23] New technologies, like wearable safety devices[24] and available online safety training, continue to be developed to encourage employers to invest in protection beyond the "canary in the coal mine" and reduce the cost to businesses of protecting their employees.
Sales
Main article: Sales

Sales are activity related to selling or the number of goods or services sold in a given time period. Sales are often integrated with all lines of business and are key to a companies' success.[25]
Management
Main article: Management
See also: Outline of business management

The efficient and effective operation of a business, and study of this subject, is called management. The major branches of management are financial management, marketing management, human resource management, strategic management, production management, operations management, service management, and information technology management.[citation needed]

Owners may manage their businesses themselves, or employ managers to do so for them. Whether they are owners or employees, managers administer three primary components of the business' value: financial resources, capital (tangible resources), and human resources. These resources are administered in at least six functional areas: legal contracting, manufacturing or service production, marketing, accounting, financing, and human resources.[citation needed]
Restructuring state enterprises

In recent decades, states modeled some of their assets and enterprises after business enterprises. In 2003, for example, the People's Republic of China modeled 80% of its state-owned enterprises on a company-type management system.[26] Many state institutions and enterprises in China and Russia have transformed into joint-stock companies, with part of their shares being listed on public stock markets.

Business process management (BPM) is a holistic management approach focused on aligning all aspects of an organization with the wants and needs of clients. BPM attempts to improve processes continuously. It can, therefore, be described as a "process optimization process". It is argued that BPM enables organizations to be more efficient, effective and capable of change than a functionally focused, traditional hierarchical management approach.[who?]
Organization and regulation
See also: Theory of the firm
Time required to start a business in 2017[27]

Most legal jurisdictions specify the forms of ownership that a business can take, creating a body of commercial law for each type.

The major factors affecting how a business is organized are usually:

    The size and scope of the business firm and its structure, management, and ownership, broadly analyzed in the theory of the firm. Generally, a smaller business is more flexible, while larger businesses, or those with wider ownership or more formal structures, will usually tend to be organized as corporations or (less often) partnerships. In addition, a business that wishes to raise money on a stock market or to be owned by a wide range of people will often be required to adopt a specific legal form to do so.
    The sector and country. Private profit-making businesses are different from government-owned bodies. In some countries, certain businesses are legally obliged to be organized in certain ways.
    Tax advantages. Different structures are treated differently in tax law and may have advantages for this reason.
    Disclosure and compliance requirements. Different business structures may be required to make less or more information public (or report it to relevant authorities) and may be bound to comply with different rules and regulations.

Many businesses are operated through a separate entity such as a corporation or a partnership (either formed with or without limited liability). Most legal jurisdictions allow people to organize such an entity by filing certain charter documents with the relevant Secretary of State or equivalent and complying with certain other ongoing obligations. The relationships and legal rights of shareholders, limited partners, or members are governed partly by the charter documents and partly by the law of the jurisdiction where the entity is organized. Generally speaking, shareholders in a corporation, limited partners in a limited partnership, and members in a limited liability company are shielded from personal liability for the debts and obligations of the entity, which is legally treated as a separate "person". This means that unless there is misconduct, the owner's own possessions are strongly protected in law if the business does not succeed.

Where two or more individuals own a business together but have failed to organize a more specialized form of vehicle, they will be treated as a general partnership. The terms of a partnership are partly governed by a partnership agreement if one is created, and partly by the law of the jurisdiction where the partnership is located. No paperwork or filing is necessary to create a partnership, and without an agreement, the relationships and legal rights of the partners will be entirely governed by the law of the jurisdiction where the partnership is located. A single person who owns and runs a business is commonly known as a sole proprietor, whether that person owns it directly or through a formally organized entity. Depending on the business needs, an adviser can decide what kind is proprietorship will be most suitable.

A few relevant factors to consider in deciding how to operate a business include:

    General partners in a partnership (other than a limited liability partnership), plus anyone who personally owns and operates a business without creating a separate legal entity, are personally liable for the debts and obligations of the business.
    Generally, corporations are required to pay tax just like "real" people. In some tax systems, this can give rise to so-called double taxation, because first the corporation pays tax on the profit, and then when the corporation distributes its profits to its owners, individuals have to include dividends in their income when they complete their personal tax returns, at which point a second layer of income tax is imposed.
    In most countries, there are laws which treat small corporations differently from large ones. They may be exempt from certain legal filing requirements or labor laws, have simplified procedures in specialized areas, and have simplified, advantageous, or slightly different tax treatment.
    "Going public" through a process known as an initial public offering (IPO) means that part of the business will be owned by members of the public. This requires the organization as a distinct entity, to disclose information to the public, and adhering to a tighter set of laws and procedures. Most public entities are corporations that have sold shares, but increasingly there are also public LLC's that sell units (sometimes also called shares), and other more exotic entities as well, such as, for example, real estate investment trusts in the US, and unit trusts in the UK. A general partnership cannot "go public".

Commercial law
Main article: Corporate law
Offices in the Los Angeles Downtown Financial District

A very detailed and well-established body of rules that evolved over a very long period of time applies to commercial transactions. The need to regulate trade and commerce and resolve business disputes helped shape the creation of law and courts. The Code of Hammurabi dates back to about 1772 BC for example and contains provisions that relate, among other matters, to shipping costs and dealings between merchants and brokers.[28] The word "corporation" derives from the Latin corpus, meaning body, and the Maurya Empire in Iron-Age India accorded legal rights to business entities.[29]

In many countries, it is difficult to compile all the laws that can affect a business into a single reference source. Laws can govern the treatment of labour and employee relations, worker protection and safety, discrimination on the basis of age, gender, disability, race, and in some jurisdictions, sexual orientation, and the minimum wage, as well as unions, worker compensation, and working hours and leave.

Some specialized businesses may also require licenses, either due to laws governing entry into certain trades, occupations or professions, that require special education or to raise revenue for local governments. Professions that require special licenses include law, medicine, piloting aircraft, selling liquor, radio broadcasting, selling investment securities, selling used cars, and roofing. Local jurisdictions may also require special licenses and taxes just to operate a business.

Some businesses are subject to ongoing special regulation, for example, public utilities, investment securities, banking, insurance, broadcasting, aviation, and health care providers. Environmental regulations are also very complex and can affect many businesses.
Capital
Mexican Stock Exchange in Paseo de la Reforma, Mexico City

When businesses need to raise money (called capital), they sometimes offer securities for sale.

Capital may be raised through private means, by an initial public offering or IPO on a stock exchange, or in other ways.

Major stock exchanges include the Shanghai Stock Exchange, Singapore Exchange, Hong Kong Stock Exchange, New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ (the USA), the London Stock Exchange (UK), the Tokyo Stock Exchange (Japan), and Bombay Stock Exchange (India). Most countries with capital markets have at least one.

Businesses that have gone public are subject to regulations concerning their internal governance, such as how executive officers' compensation is determined, and when and how information is disclosed to shareholders and to the public. In the United States, these regulations are primarily implemented and enforced by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Other western nations have comparable regulatory bodies. The regulations are implemented and enforced by the China Securities Regulation Commission (CSRC) in China. In Singapore, the regulatory authority is the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), and in Hong Kong, it is the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC).

The proliferation and increasing complexity of the laws governing business have forced increasing specialization in corporate law. It is not unheard of for certain kinds of corporate transactions to require a team of five to ten attorneys due to sprawling regulation. Commercial law spans general corporate law, employment and labor law, health-care law, securities law, mergers and acquisitions, tax law, employee benefit plans, food and drug regulation, intellectual property law on copyrights, patents, trademarks, telecommunications law, and financing.

Other types of capital sourcing include crowdsourcing on the Internet, venture capital, bank loans, and debentures.
Intellectual property
Main article: Intellectual property

Businesses often have important "intellectual property" that needs protection from competitors for the company to stay profitable. This could require patents, copyrights, trademarks, or preservation of trade secrets. Most businesses have names, logos, and similar branding techniques that could benefit from trademarking. Patents and copyrights in the United States are largely governed by federal law, while trade secrets and trademarking are mostly a matter of state law. Because of the nature of intellectual property, a business needs protection in every jurisdiction in which they are concerned about competitors. Many countries are signatories to international treaties concerning intellectual property, and thus companies registered in these countries are subject to national laws bound by these treaties. In order to protect trade secrets, companies may require employees to sign noncompete clauses which will impose limitations on an employee's interactions with stakeholders, and competitors.
Trade union
Main article: Trade union

A trade union (or labor union) is an organization of workers who have come together to achieve common goals such as protecting the integrity of its trade, improving safety standards, achieving higher pay and benefits such as health care and retirement, increasing the number of employees an employer assigns to complete the work, and better working conditions. The trade union, through its leadership, bargains with the employer on behalf of union members (rank and file members) and negotiates labor contracts (collective bargaining) with employers. The most common purpose of these associations or unions is "maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment".[30] This may include the negotiation of wages, work rules, complaint procedures, rules governing hiring, firing, and promotion of workers, benefits, workplace safety and policies.
See also

    iconBusiness portal

Main article: Outline of business

    Accounting
        List of accounting topics
    Advertising
    Bank
    Big business
    Business acumen
    Business broker
    Business ethics
        Social responsibility
    Business hours
    Business law topics
    Business mathematics
    Business mediator
    Business school
    Business tourism
    Business valuation
    Businessperson
    Capitalism
    Change management analyst
    Commerce
    Company
    Corporate personhood
    Cost overrun
    E-commerce
        Electronic business
    Economics
        Economic democracy
        Financial economics
        List of economics topics
    Entrepreneurship
    Finance
        List of finance topics
    Franchising
    Government ownership
    Human resources
    Industry
    Innovation
    Insurance
    Intellectual property
    Interim management
    International trade
        List of international trade topics
    Investment
    Job creation program
    Labour economics
    Limited liability
    List of company registers
    List of largest employers
    List of oldest companies
    Lists of companies
    Management information system
    Manufacturing
        List of production topics
    Marketing
        List of marketing topics
    Money
    Organizational studies
    Profit
    Real estate
        List of real estate topics
    Revenue shortfall
    Shareholder value
    Small business
    Strategic management
    Strategic planning
    Tax
    Trade
    Types of business entity

References

Compare: American Heritage Dictionary "business [:] 1. The activity of buying and selling commodities, products, or services".
Longman Business English Dictionary
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English "business [:] 1 [...] the activity of making money by producing or buying and selling goods, or providing services".
Oxford Living Dictionaries "business [:] 2 The practice of making one's living by engaging in commerce."
Burton's Legal Thesaurus, 4E. S.v. "business." Retrieved April 1, 2018 from https://legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/business
Holloway, S. S.; Parmigiani, A. (2014). "Friends and Profits Don't Mix: The Performance Implications of Repeated Partnerships". Academy of Management Journal. 59 (2): 460. doi:10.5465/amj.2013.0581.
US Small Business Administration
Small Business Chamber of Commerce, Inc.
Definition of a Franchise Business
hWelsh, Dianne H. B.; Desplaces, David E.; Davis, fAmy E. (2011). "A Comparison of Retail Franchises, Independent Businesses, and Purchased Existing Independent Business Startups: Lessons from the Kauffman Firm Survey". Journal of Marketing Channels. 18: 3. doi:10.1080/1046669X.2011.533109.
Black's Law and lee Dictionary. Second Pocket Edition. Bryan A. Garner, editor. West. 2001.
Companies Act 2006
root. "Limited Liability Company (LLC) Definition - Investopedia". Investopedia.
"Investopedia - Public Limited Company".
Needles, Belverd E.; Powers, Marian (2013). Principles of Financial Accounting. Financial Accounting Series (12 ed.). Cengage Learning.
Accounting Research Bulletins No. 7 Reports of Committee on Terminology (Report). Committee on Accounting Procedure, American Institute of Accountants. November 1940. Retrieved 31 December 2013.
DIWAN, Jaswith. ACCOUNTING CONCEPTS & THEORIES. LONDON: MORRE. pp. 001–002. id# 94452.
Peggy Bishop Lane on Why Accounting Is the Language of Business, Knowledge @ Wharton High School, September 23, 2013, retrieved 25 December 2013
"Department of Accounting". Foster School of Business. Foster School of Business. 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2013.
CFI. "What is Finance?". Retrieved 7 April 2020.
Marketing definition approved in October 2007 by the American Marketing Association: [1] Archived 2010-12-27 at the Wayback Machine.
Leigh, J. (2011). Economic Burden of Occupational Injury and Illness in the United States. Milbank Quarterly, 89(4), 728-772. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2011.00648.x
Rowe, Kelly P. (2007). OSHA and small businesses: A winning combination: When small businesses tap into OSHA's many resources, everyone benefits. Occupational Hazards, 69(3), 33.
Goldberg, S. (2016). Business Technical: Wearable Devices at Work. Business Insurance, 50(2), 1.
"How To Organize Your Marketing Department In The Digital Age". Retrieved October 15, 2018.
Major Industries. People.com
"Time required to start a business". Our World in Data. Retrieved 7 March 2020.
"Law Code of Hammurabi".
Vikramaditya S. Khanna. "The Economic History of the Corporate Form in Ancient India" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-10-19.

    Webb, Sidney; Webb, Beatrice (1920). History of Trade Unionism. Longmans and Co. London. ch. I

External links
Business
at Wikipedia's sister projects

    Definitions from Wiktionary
    Media from Wikimedia Commons
    News from Wikinews
    Quotations from Wikiquote
    Texts from Wikisource
    Textbooks from Wikibooks
    Resources from Wikiversity 

Library resources about
Business

    Resources in your library

Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	

    BNF: cb11950174q (data) GND: 4061963-1 LCCN: sh85018285 NARA: 10637168 NDL: 00565710

Categories:

    BusinessEntrepreneurshipMain topic articles

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    View source
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikiquote

Print/export

    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    العربية
    ܐܪܡܝܐ
    Avañe'ẽ
    Azərbaycanca
    تۆرکجه
    বাংলা
    Bân-lâm-gú
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    भोजपुरी
    Български
    བོད་ཡིག
    Català
    Čeština
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Español
    Esperanto
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Français
    Frysk
    Gaeilge
    Gàidhlig
    Galego
    客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
    한국어
    Hawaiʻi
    Հայերեն
    हिन्दी
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Iñupiak
    Íslenska
    עברית
    Jawa
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    Қазақша
    Kiswahili
    Kreyòl ayisyen
    Kriyòl gwiyannen
    Kurdî
    Кыргызча
    ລາວ
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lietuvių
    Magyar
    Malagasy
    मराठी
    مصرى
    Bahasa Melayu
    Mirandés
    Монгол
    Nederlands
    नेपाली
    नेपाल भाषा
    日本語
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    پنجابی
    پښتو
    Patois
    Polski
    Português
    Română
    Русиньскый
    Русский
    Gagana Samoa
    संस्कृतम्
    Scots
    Shqip
    Sicilianu
    සිංහල
    Simple English
    سنڌي
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Soomaaliga
    کوردی
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Sunda
    Svenska
    Tagalog
    தமிழ்
    Татарча/tatarça
    తెలుగు
    ไทย
    Тоҷикӣ
    ᏣᎳᎩ
    Türkçe
    Українська
    اردو
    Tiếng Việt
    文言
    Winaray
    吴语
    Xitsonga
    ייִדיש
    粵語
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 14 May 2020, at 00:43 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki



kangaroo


A kangaroo is a marsupial from the family Macropodidae (macropods, meaning 'large foot'). In common use the term is used to describe the largest species from this family, the Red Kangaroo, the Antilopine Kangaroo, and the Eastern and Western Grey Kangaroo of the Macropus genus. The family also includes many smaller species which include the wallabies, tree-kangaroos, wallaroos, pademelons and the Quokka, some 63 living species in all.  Kangaroos are endemic to the continent of Australia, while the smaller macropods are found in Australia and New Guinea.

In general, larger kangaroos have adapted much better to changes wrought to the Australian landscape by humans and though many of their smaller cousins are endangered, they are plentiful. They are not farmed to any extent, but wild kangaroos are shot for meat, over which there is controversy.  Steve Dow: "An industry that's under the gun". Sydney Morning Herald online, September 26, 2007.

The kangaroo is an Australian icon: it is featured on the Australian coat of arms,  Australia's coat of arms URL accessed January 6, 2007.  on some of its currency,  The Australian currency URL accessed January 6, 2007.  and is used by many Australian organisations, including Qantas.  The Kangaroo symbol URL accessed January 6, 2007.



The word kangaroo derives from the Guugu Yimidhirr word gangurru, referring to a grey kangaroo.  Etymology of mammal names URL accessed January 7, 2007.  The name was first recorded as "Kangooroo or Kanguru" on 4 August,1770, by Lieutenant (later Captain) James Cook on the banks of the Endeavour River at the site of modern Cooktown, when HM Bark Endeavour was beached for almost seven weeks to repair damage sustained on the Great Barrier Reef.

A common myth about the kangaroo's English name is that it came from the Aboriginal words for "I don't understand you." According to this legend, Captain James Cook and naturalist Sir Joseph Banks were exploring Australia when they happened upon the animal. They asked a nearby local what the creatures were called. The local responded "Kangaroo", meaning "I don't understand you", which Cook took to be the name of the creature.  Tour lecture,  , Dawsonville, GA. 
Kangaroo soon became adopted into standard English where it has come to mean any member of the family of kangaroos and wallabies.  Male kangaroos are called bucks, boomers, jacks, or old men; females are does, flyers, or jills, and the young ones are joeys.  Animal Bytes: Kangaroo and Wallaby URL accessed January 7, 2007.  The collective noun for kangaroos is a mob, troop, or court. Kangaroos are sometimes colloquially referred to as roos.



A Tasmanian Forester (Eastern Grey) Kangaroo in motion.
There are four species that are commonly referred to as kangaroos:
* The Red Kangaroo (Macropus rufus) is the largest surviving marsupial anywhere in the world. Fewer in numbers, the Red Kangaroo occupies the arid and semi-arid centre of the continent. A large male can be 2 metres (6 ft 7 in) tall and weigh 90 kg (200 lb).   
* The Eastern Grey Kangaroo (Macropus giganteus) is less well-known than the red (outside of Australia), but the most often seen, as its range covers the fertile eastern part of the continent. 
* The Western Grey Kangaroo (Macropus fuliginosus) is slightly smaller again at about 54 kg (119 lb) for a large male. It is found in the southern part of Western Australia, South Australia near the coast, and the Darling River basin.
* The Antilopine Kangaroo (Macropus antilopinus) is, essentially, the far-northern equivalent of the Eastern and Western Grey Kangaroos. Like them, it is a creature of the grassy plains and woodlands, and gregarious.

In addition, there are about 50 smaller macropods closely related to the kangaroo in the family Macropodidae.



Red Kangaroo (Macropus rufus)
Europeans have long regarded Kangaroos as strange animals. Early explorers described them as creatures that had heads like deer (without antlers), stood upright like men, and hopped like frogs.  Combined with the two-headed appearance of a mother kangaroo, this led many back home to dismiss them as travellers' tales for quite some time.

Kangaroos have large, powerful hind legs, large feet adapted for leaping, a long muscular tail for balance, and a small head. Like all marsupials, female kangaroos have a pouch called a marsupium in which joeys complete postnatal development.




Kangaroos are the only large animals to use hopping as a means of locomotion. The comfortable hopping speed for Red Kangaroo is about 20 25 km/h (13 16 mph), but speeds of up to 70 km/h (44 mph) can be attained, over short distances, while it can sustain a speed of 40 km/h (25 mph) for  nearly two kilometres.    This fast and energy-efficient method of travel has evolved because of the need to regularly cover large distances in search of food and water, rather than the need to escape predators.

Because of its long feet, it cannot walk correctly. To move at slow speeds, it uses its tail to form a tripod with its two forelimbs. It then raises its hind feet forward, in a form of locomotion called "crawl-walking."

The average life expectancy of a kangaroo is about 4 6 years.



Different species of kangaroos eat different diets.  Eastern grey kangaroos are predominantly grazers eating a wide variety of grasses whereas some other species (e.g. red kangaroos and swamp wallabies) include significant amounts of shrubs in the diet. The smaller species of kangaroos also consume hypogeal fungi.  Many species are nocturnal  Archives URL accessed January 7, 2007.  and crepuscular,  Columbus Zoo article URL accessed January 7, 2007.  usually spending the days resting in shade and the cool evenings, nights and mornings moving about and feeding.

Because of its grazing, kangaroos have developed specialized teeth. Its incisors are able to crop grass close to the ground, and its molars chop and grind the grass. Since the two sides of the lower jaw are not joined together, the lower incisors are farther apart, giving the kangaroo a wider bite. The silica in grass is abrasive, so kangaroo molars move forward as they are ground down, and eventually fall out, replaced by new teeth that grow in the back.



Despite having a herbivorous diet similar to ruminants such as cattle which release large quantities of methane through exhaling and eructation, kangaroos release virtually none. The hydrogen byproduct of fermentation is instead converted into acetate, which is then used to provide further energy. Scientists are interested in the possibility of transferring the bacteria responsible from kangaroos to cattle, since the greenhouse gas effect of methane is 23 times greater than that of carbon dioxide.  Radio Australia - Innovations: 
"Methane In Agriculture." 15 August  2004. Retrieved 28 August 2007.



Kangaroos have few natural predators. The Thylacine, considered by palaeontologists to have once been a major natural predator of the kangaroo, is now extinct. Other extinct predators included the Marsupial Lion, Megalania and the Wonambi. However, with the arrival of humans in Australia at least 50,000 years ago and the introduction of the dingo about 5,000 years ago, kangaroos have had to adapt.   The mere barking of a dog can set a full-grown male boomer into a wild frenzy.   Wedge-tailed Eagles and other raptors usually eat kangaroo carrion. Goannas and other carnivorous reptiles also pose a danger to smaller kangaroo species when other food sources are lacking.

Along with dingos and other canids, introduced species like foxes and feral cats also pose a threat to kangaroo populations. Kangaroos and wallabies are adept swimmers, and often flee into waterways if presented with the option. If pursued into the water, a large kangaroo may use its forepaws to hold the predator underwater so as to drown it.  Canadian Museum of Nature - Kangaroo URL accessed January 6, 2007.  Another defensive tactic described by witnesses is catching the attacking dog  with the forepaws and disembowelling it with the hind legs.



Newborn joey sucking on a teat in the pouch
Kangaroos have developed a number of adaptations to a dry, infertile continent and highly variable climate. As with all marsupials, the young are born at a very early stage of development   after a gestation of 31 36 days. At this stage, only the forelimbs are somewhat developed, to allow the newborn to climb to the pouch and attach to a teat. In comparison, a human embryo at a similar stage of development would be about seven weeks old, and premature babies born at less than 23 weeks are usually not mature enough to survive. The joey will usually stay in the pouch for about nine months (180 320 days for the Western Grey) before starting to leave the pouch for small periods of time. It is usually fed by its mother until reaching 18 months.

The female kangaroo is usually pregnant in permanence, except on the day she gives birth; however, she has the ability to freeze the development of an embryo until the previous joey is able to leave the pouch. This is known as diapause, and will occur in times of drought and in areas with poor food sources.  The composition of the milk produced by the mother varies according to the needs of the joey. In addition, the mother is able to produce two different kinds of milk simultaneously for the newborn and the older joey still in the pouch.

Unusually, during a dry period, males will not produce sperm, and females will only conceive if there has been enough rain to produce a large quantity of green vegetation.

Hindleg of a kangaroo Kangaroos and wallabies have large, stretchy  tendons in their hind legs. They store elastic strain energy in the tendons of their large hind legs, providing most of the energy required for each hop by the spring action of the tendons rather than by any muscular effort. This is true in all animal species which have muscles connected to their skeleton through elastic elements such as tendons, but the effect is more pronounced in kangaroos.

There is also a link between the hopping action and breathing: as the feet leave the ground, air is expelled from the lungs; bringing the feet forward ready for landing refills the lungs, providing further energy efficiency. Studies of kangaroos and wallabies have demonstrated that, beyond the minimum energy expenditure required to hop at all, increased speed requires very little extra effort (much less than the same speed increase in, say, a horse, dog or human), and that the extra energy is required to carry extra weight. For kangaroos, the key benefit of hopping is not speed to escape predators the top speed of a kangaroo is no higher than that of a similarly-sized quadruped, and the Australian native predators are in any case less fearsome than those of other continents but economy: in an infertile continent with highly variable weather patterns, the ability of a kangaroo to travel long distances at moderately high speed in search of food sources is crucial to survival.

A sequencing project of the Kangaroo genome was started in 2004 as a collaboration between Australia (mainly funded by the state of Victoria) and the National Institutes of Health in the US.  Kangaroo hops in line for genome sequencing URL accessed January 6, 2007.  The genome of a marsupial such as the kangaroo is of great interest to scientists studying comparative genomics because marsupials are at an ideal degree of evolutionary divergence from humans: mice are too close and haven't developed many different functions, while birds are genetically too remote. The dairy industry has also expressed some interest in this project.



Eye disease  is rare but not new among kangaroos.  The first official report of kangaroo blindness took place in 1994, in central New South Wales.  The following year, reports of blind kangaroos appeared in Victoria and South Australia.  By 1996, the disease had spread "across the desert to Western Australia".  Australian authorities were concerned that the disease could spread to other livestock and possibly humans.  Researchers at the Australian Animal Health Laboratories in Geelong detected a virus called the Wallal virus in two species of midge, believed to have been the carriers.       Veterinarians also discovered that less than three percent of kangaroos exposed to the virus developed blindness.



Before European settlement, the kangaroo was a very important animal for Australian Aborigines, for its meat, hide, bones and sinews. In addition, there were important Dreaming stories and ceremonies involving the kangaroo.  Aherrenge is a current kangaroo dreaming site in the Northern Territory. The game of Marn grook was played using a ball made from kangaroo  by the Kurnai people.

Unlike many of the smaller macropods, kangaroos have fared well since European settlement. European settlers cut down forests to create vast grasslands for sheep and cattle grazing, added stock watering points in arid areas, and have substantially reduced the number of dingoes.

Kangaroos are shy and retiring by nature, and in normal circumstances present no threat to humans. Male kangaroos often "box" amongst each other, playfully, for dominance, or in competition for mates. The dexterity of their forepaws is utilised in both punching and grappling with the foe, but the real danger lies in a serious kick with the hindleg. The sharpened toenails can disembowel an opponent.

There are very few records of kangaroos attacking humans without provocation, however several such unprovoked attacks in 2004 spurred fears of a rabies-like disease possibly affecting the marsupials. The only reliably documented case of a fatality from a kangaroo attack occurred in New South Wales, in 1936. A hunter was killed when he tried to rescue his two dogs from a heated fray. Other suggested causes for erratic and dangerous kangaroo behaviour include extreme thirst and hunger.

In 2003, Lulu, an Eastern Grey, saved a farmer's life.  She received the RSPCA National Animal Valor Award on May 19 of the next year.



A "kangaroo crossing" sign on an Australian highway.
A kangaroo crossing a highway.
A collision with a vehicle is capable of killing a kangaroo. Kangaroos dazzled by headlights or startled by engine noise have been known to leap in front of cars.  Since kangaroos in mid-bound can reach speeds of around 50 km/h (31 mph) and are relatively heavy, the force of impact can be severe.  Small vehicles may be destroyed, while larger vehicles may suffer engine damage. The risk of harm to vehicle occupants is greatly increased if the windscreen is the point of impact.  As a result, "kangaroo crossing" signs are commonplace in Australia.

Vehicles that frequent isolated roads, where roadside assistance may be scarce, are often fitted with "roo bars" to minimise damage caused by collision. Bonnet-mounted devices, designed to scare wildlife off the road with ultrasound and other methods, have been devised and marketed.

If a female is the victim of a collision, animal welfare groups ask that her pouch be checked for any surviving joey, in which case it may be removed to a wildlife sanctuary or veterinary surgeon for rehabilitation.  Likewise, when an adult kangaroo is injured in a collision, a vet, the RSPCA or the National Parks and Wildlife Service can be consulted for instructions on proper care. In New South Wales, rehabilitation of kangaroos is carried out by volunteers from WIRES.



Occasionally, individuals take on the task of rearing a recovered joey themselves. The rule-of-thumb says that if the joey is already covered with fur at the time of the accident (as opposed to still being in its embryonic stage), it stands a good chance of growing up properly. Lactose-free milk is required, otherwise the animal may develop blindness. They hop readily into a cloth bag when it is lowered in front of them approximately to the height where the mother's pouch would be. The joey's instinct is to "cuddle up", thereby endearing themselves to their keepers, but after hand-rearing a joey, it cannot usually be released into the wild and be expected to provide for itself immediately. Usually wildlife sanctuaries are willing to adopt kangaroos which are no longer practical, or have grown too large to contain, needing at least 1 acre and 7ft boundary fences for a fully grown kangaroo.




Kangaroos have been featured on coins, as well as being used as emblems and logos. They have also been used as mascots and in the naming of sports teams and are extremely well-represented in films, television, toys and souvenirs around the world.



*Dawson, Terence J. 1995. Kangaroos: Biology of the Largest Marsupials. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York. Second printing: 1998. ISBN 0-8014-8262-3.

leopard



The leopard (Panthera pardus) is an Old World mammal of the Felidae family and the smallest of the four 'big cats' of the genus Panthera, along with the tiger, lion, and jaguar. Leopards that are melanistic, either all-black or very dark in coloration, are known colloquially as Black Panthers.

Once distributed across southern Eurasia and Africa, from Korea to South Africa and Spain, it has disappeared from much of its former range and now chiefly occurs in subsaharan Africa. There are fragmented populations in Israel, the Indian subcontinent, Indochina, Malaysia, and western China. Despite the loss of range and continued population declines, the cat remains a least concern species;  its numbers are greater than that of the other Panthera species, all of which face more acute conservation concerns.

The species' success owes in part to its opportunistic hunting behaviour and its adaptability to a variety of habitats. The leopard consumes virtually any animal it can catch and ranges from rainforest to desert. Its ecological role resembles that of the similarly-sized cougar in the Americas. Physically, the spotted cat most closely resembles the jaguar, although it is of lighter build.



In Antiquity, it was believed that a leopard was a hybrid between a lion and a panther, as is reflected in its name, a Greek compound word derived from λέων léon ("lion") and πάρδος párdos ("male panther"), the latter related to Sanskrit पृदाकु pṝdāku ("snake, tiger, panther").

A panther can be any of several species of large felid; in North America, the term refers to cougars, in South America, jaguars, and elsewhere, leopards. Early naturalists distinguished between leopards and panthers not by colour (a common misconception), but by the length of the tail panthers having longer tails than leopards.

Felis pardus was one of the many species described in Linnaeus's 18th-century work, Systema Naturae.

The generic component of its modern scientific designation, Panthera pardus, is derived from Latin via Greek πάνθηρ pánthēr. A folk etymology held that it was a compound of παν pan ("all") and θηρ ("beast"). However, it is believed instead to derive from an Indo-Iranian word meaning "whitish-yellow, pale"; in Sanskrit, this word's reflex was पाण्डर pāṇḍara, from which was derived पुण्डरीक puṇḍárīka ("tiger", among other things), then borrowed into Greek.




The leopard is an agile and graceful predator. Although smaller than the other members of Panthera, the leopard is still able to take large prey given a massive skull that well utilizes powerful jaw muscles.  Its body is comparatively long for a cat and its legs are short.  Head and body length is between 90 and 190 cm, the tail reaches 60 to 110cm. Shoulder height is 45 to 80 cm. Males are considerably larger than females and weigh 37 to 90 kg compared to 28 to 60 kg for females. Ronald M. Nowak: Walker's Mammals of the World. Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999 ISBN 0-8018-5789-9

One of many spotted cats, a leopard may be mistaken for a cheetah or a jaguar. The leopard has rosettes rather than cheetah's simple spots, but they lack internal spots, unlike the jaguar. The leopard is larger and less lanky than the cheetah but smaller than the jaguar. The leopard's black, irregular rosettes serve as camouflage. They are circular in East Africa but tend to be square in southern Africa.  .

Leopards have been reported to reach 21 years of age in captivity.




A melanistic leopard, or "black panther"
A melanistic morph of the leopard occurs particularly in mountainous areas and rain forests. The black color is heritable and caused by only one recessive gene locus. In some regions, for example on the Malayan Peninsula, up to half of all leopards are black. In Africa black leopards seem to be most common in the Ethiopian Highlands. While they are commonly called black panthers, the term is not applied exclusively to leopards. Black leopards are less successful on the African plains because their colouration makes them stand out.




As of 1996, the leopard had the largest distribution of any wild cat,  although populations before and since have shown a declining trend and are fragmented outside of subsaharan Africa. The IUCN notes that within subsaharan Africa the species is "still numerous and even thriving in marginal habitats" where other large cats have disappeared, but that populations in North Africa may be extinct. In Asia, data on distribution are mixed: populations in Southwest and Central Asia are small and fragmented; in the northeast portion of the range, they are critically endangered; and in Indian, Southeast Asia, and China, the cat is still relatively abundant.  Leopards also like to live in grasslands, woodlands and riverside forests.



Graceful and stealthy, leopards are famous for their ability to go undetected. They are good, agile climbers, but cannot get down from a tree headfirst, because they do not have the ankle flexibility—the only two cats that do are the Margay and the Clouded Leopard. Female leopard. Note the white spots on the back of the ears used for communication with cubs when hunting in long grassAlong with climbing, they are strong swimmers but not as fond of water as tigers; for example, leopards will not normally lie in water. They are mainly nocturnal but can be seen at any time of day and will even hunt during daytime on overcast days. In regions where they are hunted, nocturnal behaviour is more common. These cats are solitary, avoiding one another. However, three or four are sometimes seen together. Hearing and eyesight are the strongest of these cats' senses and are extremely acute. Olfaction is relied upon as well, but not for hunting. When making a threat, leopards stretch their backs, depress their ribcages between their shoulder blades so they stick out, and lower their heads (similar to domestic cats). During the day they may lie in bush, on rocks, or in a tree with their tails hanging below the treetops and giving them away.



Leopards are opportunistic hunters. Although mid-sized animals are preferred, the leopard will eat anything from dung beetles to 900 kg male giant elands.  Nowell, K.; Jackson, P. eds. (1996).  Wild Cats. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan. IUCN/SSC Cat Specialist Group. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland. (see Panthera Pardus, pp. 24 – 29.)  Their diet consists mostly of ungulates and monkeys, but rodents, reptiles, amphibians, birds and fish are also eaten. Schaller, p. 290  In fact, they hunt about 90 different species of animals. A solitary dog is a potential prey for leopards, although a pack of dogs can kill or drive off a leopard. Even large pythons are potential prey for leopards. In Africa, mid-sized antelopes provide a majority of the leopard's prey, especially impala and Thomson's gazelles. Schaller, p. 291  In Asia the leopard preys on deer such as chitals and muntjacs as well as various Asian antelopes and Ibex. Leopards have even been spotted killing and eating crocodiles.

The leopard stalks its prey silently and at the last minute pounces on its prey and strangles its throat with a quick bite. Leopards often hide their kills in dense vegetation or take them up trees,  and are capable of carrying animals up to three times their own weight this way. Storing carcasses up trees keeps them away from other predators such as spotted hyenas, jackals, tigers and lions, though the latter will occasionally be successful in climbing and fetching the leopard kills. Schaller, p. 293

One survey of nearly 30 research papers found preferred prey weights of 10 to 40 kg, with 25 kg most preferred. Along with impala and chital, a preference for bushbuck and common duiker was found. Other prey selection factors include a preference for prey in small herds, in dense habitat, and those that afford the predator a low risk of injury.   
Leopard resting on a tree



A male may follow a female who catches his attention. Eventually fighting for reproductive rights can take place. Depending on the region, leopards may mate all year round (Asia and Africa) or seasonally during January to February (Manchuria and Siberia). The estrous cycle lasts about 46 days and the female usually is in heat for 6–7 days. 
   Cubs are usually born in a litter of 2–3, but infant mortality is high and mothers are not commonly seen with more than 1–2 cubs. The pregnant females find a cave, crevice among boulders, hollow tree, or thicket to give birth and make a den. Cubs open their eyes after a period of 10 days. The fur of the young tends to be longer and thicker than that of adults. Their pelage is also more gray in color with less defined spots. Around three months the infants begin to follow the mother out on hunts. At one year of age leopard young can probably fend for themselves but they remain with the mother for 18–24 months.




Studies of leopard home range size have tended to focus on protected areas, which may have led to skewed data; as of the mid-1980s, only 13% of the leopard range actually fell within a protected area.    In their IUCN survey of the literature, Nowell and Jackson suggest male home territories vary between 30-78 square kilometers, but just 15-16 km² for females.  Research in a conservation area in Kenya shows similar territory sizes and sex differential: 32.8 km² ranges for males, on average, and 14 km² for females.    In Nepal, somewhat larger male ranges have been found at about 48 km², while female ranges are in-keeping with other research, at 17 km²; female home territories were seen to decrease to just five to seven km² when young cubs were present, while the sexual difference in range size seemed to be in positive proportion to overall increase.     However, significant variations in size of home territories have been suggested across the leopard's range. In Namibia, for instance, research that focussed on spatial ecology in farmlands outside of protected areas found ranges that were consistently above 100 km², with some more than 300 km²; admitting that their data were at odds with others', the researchers also suggested little or no sexual variation in the size of territories.  Virtually all sources suggest that males do have larger ranges. There seems to be little or no overlap in territory amongst males, although overlap exists between the sexes; one radio-collar analysis in the Ivory Coast found a female home range completely enclosed within a male's.

The leopard is solitary and, aside from mating, interactions between individuals appear to be infrequent.  Aggressive enounters have been observed, however. Two of five males studied over a period of a year at a game reserve in South Africa died, both violently. One was initially wounded in a male-male territorial battle over a carcass; taken in by researchers, it was released after a successful convalescence only to be killed by a different male a few months later. A second was killed by another predator, possibly a spotted hyena. A third of the five was badly wounded in intraspecific fighting, but recovered.



Indian Leopard
It has been suggested that there may be as many as 30 extant subspecies of the Leopard.
However, modern taxonomic analyses have demonstrated that only 8/9 subspecies are valid.  Olga Uphyrkina et al. (November 2001). Phylogenetics, genome diversity and origin of modern leopard, Panthera pardus. Molecular Ecology, Volume 10, Issue 11, Page 2617.  Abstract   Sriyanie Miththapala. (August 1996). Phylogeographic Subspecies Recognition in Leopards (Panthera pardus): Molecular Genetic Variation. Conservation Biology,
Volume 10, Issue 4, Page 1115.  Abstract

Sri Lankan Leopard
Female leopard in the Sabi Sands area of South Africa.  Note the white spot on the tail used for communicating with cubs while hunting or in long grass
Other subspecies under the old taxonomic division:

Today usually included in the African Leopard (Panthera pardus pardus):

Today usually included in The Persian Leopard (Panthera pardus saxicolor):

Today usually included in The Indian Leopard (Panthera pardus fusca)







A pseudo-melanistic leopard has a normal background colour, but its excessive markings have coalesced so that its back seems to be an unbroken expanse of black. In some specimens, the area of solid black extends down the flanks and limbs; only a few lateral streaks of golden-brown indicate the presence of normal background colour. Any spots on the flanks and limbs that have not merged into the mass of swirls and stripes are unusually small and discrete, rather than forming rosettes. The face and underparts are paler and dappled like those of ordinary spotted leopards.

In a paper about panthers and ounces of Asia, Reginald Innes Pocock used a photo of a leopard skin from southern India; it had large black-rimmed blotches, each containing a number of dots and it resembled the pattern of a jaguar or clouded leopard. Another of Pocock's leopard skins from southern India had the normal rosettes broken up and fused and so much additional pigment that the animal looked like a black leopard streaked and speckled with yellow.

Most other colour morphs of leopards are known only from paintings or museum specimens. There have been very rare examples where the spots of a normal black leopard have coalesced to give a jet black leopard with no visible markings. Pseudo-melanism (abundism) occurs in leopards. The spots are more densely packed than normal and merge to largely obscure the background colour. They may form swirls and, in some places, solid black areas. Unlike a true black leopard the tawny background colour is visible in places. One pseudo-melanistic leopard had a tawny orange coat with coalescing rosettes and spots, but white belly with normal black spots (like a black-and-tan dog).

A 1910 description of a pseudo-melanistic leopard:

Another pseudo-melanistic leopard skin was described in 1915 by Holdridge Ozro Collins who had purchased it in 1912. It had been killed in Malabar, India that same year.

In May 1936, the British Natural History Museum exhibited the mounted skin of an unusual Somali leopard. The pelt was richly decorated with an intricate pattern of swirling stripes, blotches, curls and fine-line traceries. This is different from a spotted leopard, but similar to a King Cheetah hence the modern cryptozoology term King Leopard. Between 1885 and 1934, six pseudo-melanistic leopards were recorded in the Albany and Grahamstown districts of South Africa. This indicated a mutation in the local leopard population. Other King Leopards have been recorded from Malabar in southwestern India. Shooting for trophies may have wiped out these populations.
 link title




Pumapard, Rothschild Museum, Tring
A pumapard is a hybrid animal resulting from a union between a leopard and a puma. Three sets of these hybrids were bred in the late 1890s and early 1900s by Carl Hagenbeck at his animal park in Hamburg, Germany. Most did not reach adulthood. One of these was purchased in 1898 by Berlin Zoo.  A similar hybrid in Berlin Zoo purchased from Carl Hagenbeck was a cross between a male leopard and a female puma. Hamburg Zoo's specimen was the reverse pairing, the one in the black and white photo, fathered by a puma bred to an Indian leopardess. 
Whether born to a female Puma mated to a male Leopard, or to a male Puma mated to a female Leopard, pumapards inherit a form of dwarfism. Those reported grew to only half the size of the parents. They have a Puma-like long body (proportional to the limbs, but nevertheless shorter than either parent), but short legs. The coat is variously described as sandy, tawny or greyish with brown, chestnut or "faded" rosettes.



Dionysus and a panther. Crater. The Louvre c. 370 BC
Leopards have been known to humans since antiquity and have featured in the art, mythology and folklore of many countries where they have occurred historically, such as Ancient Greece, Persia and Rome, as well as some where they haven't such as England. The modern use of the leopard as an emblem for sport or coat of arms is much more restricted to Africa, though numerous products worldwide have used the name.


Leopards were kept in a menagerie established by King John at the Tower of London in the 13th century; around 1235 three animals were given to Henry III by the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II.



Despite its size, this largely nocturnal and arboreal predator is difficult to see in the wild. A female leopard in the Sabi Sands of South Africa illustrating just how close tourists can get to these wild cats.The best location to see leopards in Africa is in the Sabi Sand Private Game Reserve in South Africa, where leopards are habituated to safari vehicles and are seen on a daily basis at very close range. In Asia, one can see leopards Yala National Park in Sri Lanka, which has one of the world's highest density of wild leopards, but even here sightings are by no means guaranteed because more than half the park is closed off to the public, allowing the animals to thrive. Another good destination for leopard watching is the recently reopened Wilpattu National Park, also in Sri Lanka. In India the leopards are found all over the country and there is maximum man-animal conflict here only as they are spread everywhere.The best places in India can be national parks in Madhya Pradesh and in Uttarakhand.



Coat of arms of the German state of Baden-Württemberg

The lion passant guardant or "leopard" is a frequently used charge in heraldry, most commonly appearing in groups of three. The heraldric leopard lacks spots and sports a mane, making it visually almost identical to the heraldric lion, and the two are often used interchangeably. These traditional lion passant guardants appear in the coat of arms of England and many of its former colonies; more modern naturalistic (leopard-like) depictions appear on the coat of arms of several African nations including Benin, Malawi, Somalia, Democratic Republic of the Congo and  Gabon which uses a black panther. The Leopard is also the unofficial national animal of Germany, replacing the Tiger, which was, along with the eagle, the national animal of Nazi Germany. The leopard tank was a German designed tank which entered service in 1965.



The Leopard men were a West African secret society who practised cannibalism. They were centred in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire.

Members would dress in leopard skins, waylaying travellers with sharp claw-like weapons in the form of leopards' claws and teeth. The victims' flesh would be cut from their bodies and distributed to members of the society. There was a superstitious belief that this ritual cannibalism would strengthen both members of the society as well as their entire tribe.




Although most leopards will tend to avoid humans, people are occasionally targeted as prey. Most healthy leopards prefer wild prey to humans, but cats who are injured, sickly or struggling with a shortage of regular prey often turn to hunting people and may become habituated to it. In the most extreme cases, both in India, a leopard dubbed "the Leopard of Rudraprayag" is claimed to have killed over 125 people and the infamous leopardess called "Panar Leopard" killed over 400 after being injured by a poacher and thus being made unable to hunt normal prey. The "Leopard of Rudraprayag" and the "Panar Leopard" were both killed by the famed hunter Jim Corbett. Man-eating leopards are considered bold by feline standards and commonly enter human settlements for prey, more so than their lion and tiger counterparts. Kenneth Anderson, who had first hand experience with many man-eating leopards, described them as far more threatening than tigers;

However because they can subsist on small prey and are less dependent on large prey, leopards are less likely to turn to man-eating than either lions or tigers.



Possibly the most famous cinematic leopard is the pet in the film Bringing Up Baby (1938) where its misadventures create madcap comedy for stars Cary Grant and Katharine Hepburn; the movie is one of the American Film Institute's "100 Greatest (American) Films".

* In the 1999 Tarzan movie by Disney, a vicious leopard, Sabor, was Tarzan's natural and mortal enemy, although the Mangani name for leopards established in the books is "Sheeta".

* In Passion in the Desert (1997), a French soldier (played by British actor Ben Daniels) while lost in Egypt during Napoleon's Egyptian campaign stumbles upon a leopard and develops a strange relationship with the animal.

Traditionally, the leopard is an uncommon name or mascot for sporting teams, though it has been used in several African soccer teams: the AFC Leopards, formed in 1964, are a soccer club based in Nairobi, Kenya, while the Black Leopards play in South Africa's Premier Soccer League, the Royal Leopards in Swaziland's Premier League, and the Golf Leopards in the Sierra Leone National Premier League. More recently, the leopard emblem has been a part of the English Basketball League since the 1990s with the Essex Leopards and later London Leopards. The New Zealand Rugby League has featured the Otahuhu Leopards and then the Tamaki Leopards.

The use of Leopards by companies is uncommon, though Nissan Leopard was a luxury sports car produced by Nissan in the 1980s and Apple Inc. released Mac OS X version 10.5, nicknamed "Leopard" on October 26th, 2007.

In The Chronicles of Narnia; The Lion, The Witch, and the Wardrobe, leopards are seen fighting alongside Peter Pevensie.



* Khalaf-von Jaffa, Norman Ali Bassam Ali Taher (2005).  The Arabian Leopard (Panthera pardus nimr). Gazelle: The Palestinian Biological Bulletin. Number 42, June 2005. pp. 1-8. (in German).
* Khalaf-Sakerfalke von Jaffa, Norman Ali Bassam Ali Taher (2006).  The Chinese Leopard (Panthera pardus japonensis, Gray 1862) in Neunkirchen Zoo, Neunkirchen, Saarland, Germany. Gazelle: The Palestinian Biological Bulletin. Number 60, December 2006. pp. 1-10.
* DeRuiter, D.J. and Berger, L.R. (2000) Leopards as Taphonomic Agents in dolomitic Caves - Implications for bone Accumulations in the Hominid-bearing Deposits of South Africa. J. Arch. Sci. 27, 665-684.


penguin



A penguin encounters a human during Antarctic summer.
Penguins (order Sphenisciformes, family Spheniscidae) are a group of aquatic, flightless birds living almost exclusively in the Southern Hemisphere.

The number of penguin species is debated. Depending on which authority is followed, penguin biodiversity varies between 17 and 20 living species, all in the subfamily Spheniscinae. Some sources consider the White-flippered Penguin a separate Eudyptula species, while others treat it as a subspecies of the Little Penguin (e.g. Williams, 1995; Davis & Renner, 2003); the actual situation seems to be more complicated (Banks et al. 2002). Similarly,  it is still unclear whether the Royal Penguin is merely a color morph of the Macaroni penguin. Also eligible to be a separate species is the Northern population of Rockhopper penguins (Davis & Renner, 2003). Although all penguin species are native to the southern hemisphere, they are not, contrary to popular belief, found only in cold climates, such as Antarctica. In fact, only a few species of penguin actually live so far south. At least ten  species live in the temperate zone; one lives as far north as the Galápagos Islands: the Galápagos Penguin.

The largest living species is the Emperor Penguin (Aptenodytes forsteri): adults average about 1.1 m (3 ft 7 in) tall and weigh 35 kg (75 lb) or more. The smallest penguin species is the Little Blue Penguin (also known as the Fairy Penguin), which stands around 40 cm tall (16 in) and weighs 1 kg (2.2 lb). Among extant penguins larger penguins inhabit colder regions, while smaller penguins are generally found in temperate or even tropical climates (see also Bergmann's Rule). Some prehistoric species attained enormous sizes, becoming as tall or as heavy as an adult human (see below for more). These were not restricted to Antarctic regions; on the contrary, subantarctic regions harboured high diversity, and at least one giant penguin occurred in a region not quite 2000 km south of the Equator 35 mya , in a climate decidedy warmer than today.

Most penguins feed on krill, fish, squid, and other forms of sealife caught while swimming underwater. They spend half of their life on land and half in the oceans.

Penguins seem to have no special fear of humans and have approached groups of explorers without hesitation. This is probably on account of there being no land predators in Antarctica or the nearby offshore islands that prey on or attack penguins. Instead, penguins are at risk at sea from predators such as the leopard seal. Typically, penguins do not approach closer than about 3 meters (9 ft); they become nervous at about that distance. This is also the distance that Antarctic tourists are told to keep from penguins (tourists are not supposed to approach closer than 3 meters, but are not expected to withdraw if the penguins come closer).



250px
Penguins are superbly adapted to an aquatic life. Their wings have become flippers, useless for flight in the air. In the water, however, penguins are astonishingly agile. Within the smooth plumage a layer of air is preserved, ensuring buoyancy. The air layer also helps insulate the birds in cold waters. 
On land, penguins use their tails and wings to maintain balance for their upright stance.

All penguins are countershaded - that is, they have a white underside and a dark (mostly black) upperside. This is for camouflage. A predator looking up from below (such as an orca or a leopard seal) has difficulty distinguishing between a white penguin belly and the reflective water surface. The dark plumage on their backs camouflages them from above.

Diving penguins reach 6 to 12 km/h (3.7 to 7.5 mph), though there are reports of velocities of 27 km/h (17 mph) (which are more realistic in the case of startled flight). The small penguins do not usually dive deep; they catch their prey near the surface in dives that normally last only one or two minutes. Larger penguins can dive deep in case of need. Dives of the large Emperor Penguin have been recorded which reach a depth of 565 m (1870 ft) and last up to 22 minutes.

Penguins either waddle on their feet or slide on their bellies across the snow, a movement called "tobogganing", which conserves energy while moving quickly.  They also jump with both feet together if they want to move more quickly or cross steep or rocky terrain.

Penguins have an average sense of hearing for birds (Wever et al 1969); this is used by parents and chicks to locate one another in crowded colonies (Jouventin et al 1999). Their eyes are adapted for underwater vision, and are their primary means of locating prey and avoiding predators; in air it has been suggested that they are nearsighted, although research has not supported this hypothesis (Sivak et al 1987).

Penguins have a thick layer of insulating feathers which are designed to keep them warm in water (heat loss in water is much greater than in air).  The Emperor penguin (the largest penguin) has the largest body mass of all penguins, which further reduces relative surface area and heat loss. They also are able to control blood flow to their extremities, reducing the amount of blood which gets cold, but still keeping the extremities from freezing.  In the extreme cold of the Antarctic winter, the females are at sea fishing for food leaving the males to brave the weather by themselves.  They often huddle together to keep warm and rotate positions to make sure that each penguin gets a turn in the center of the heat pack.

They can drink salt water because their supraorbital gland filters excess salt from the bloodstream.           The salt is excreted in a concentrated fluid from the nasal passages.



Some penguins mate for life, others for just one season. They generally raise a small brood, and the parents cooperate in caring for the clutch and the young. During the cold season on the other hand the mates separate for several months to protect the egg. Usually, the male stays with the egg and keeps it warm while the female goes to sea to find food for the baby. When the female comes back, they switch roles.

When mothers lose a chick, they sometimes attempt to "steal" another mother's chick, usually unsuccessfully as other females in the vicinity assist the defending mother in keeping her chick.  In some species, such as Emperor Penguins, young penguins assemble in large groups called crèches .



Isabelline Adélie penguin on Gourdin Island, December 2002
Perhaps one in 50,000 penguins (of most species) are born with brown rather than black plumage.  These are called Isabelline penguins, possibly in reference to the legend that the archduchess Isabella of Austria vowed not to change her undergarments until her husband united the northern and southern Low Countries by taking the city of Ostend--which took three years to accomplish.   Isabellinism is different from albinism, though the faded color of the plumage calls albinism to mind.  Isabelline penguins tend to live shorter lives than normal penguins, as they are not well camouflaged against the deep, and are often passed over as mates.



Updated after Marples (1962), Acosta Hospitaleche (2004), and Ksepka et al. (2006). See the gallery for images of most living species.

ORDER SPHENISCIFORMES 

Taxonomy: Clarke et al. (2003) and Ksepka et al. (2006) apply the phylogenetic taxon Spheniscidae what here is referred to as Spheniscinae. Furthermore, they restrict the phylogenetic taxon Sphenisciformes to flightless taxa, and establish (Clarke et al. 2003) the phylogenetic taxon Pansphenisciformes as equivalent to the Linnean taxon Sphenisciformes, i.e., including any flying basal "proto-penguins" to be discovered eventually. Given that neither the relationships of the penguin subfamilies to each other nor the placement of the penguins in the avian phylogeny is presently resolved, this seems spurious and in any case is confusing; the established Linnean system is thus followed here.



The evolutionary history of penguins is well-researched and represents a showcase of evolutionary biogeography; though as penguin bones of any one species vary much in size and few good specimens are known, the alpha taxonomy of many prehistoric forms still leaves much to be desired. Some seminal articles about penguin prehistory have been published since 2005 (Bertelli & Giannini 2005, Baker et al. 2006, Ksepka et al. 2006, Slack et al. 2006), the evolution of the living genera can be considered resolved by now.

According to the comprehensive review of the available evidence by Ksepka et al. (2006), the basal penguins lived around the time of the Cretaceous–Tertiary extinction event somewhere in the general area of (southern) New Zealand and Byrd Land, Antarctica. Due to plate tectonics, these areas were at that time less than   apart rather than the   of today. The most recent common ancestor of penguins and their sister clade can be roughly dated to the Campanian-Maastrichtian boundary, around 70-68 mya (Baker et al. 2006, Slack et al. 2006) The exact divergence dates according to Baker et al. (2006) mentioned in this section are not as precisely resolved as it appears to be due to uncertainties of the molecular clock used. 
What can be said as certainly as possible in the absence of direct (i.e., fossil) evidence is that by the end of the Cretaceous, the penguin lineage must have been evolutionarily well distinct, though much less so morphologically; it is fairly likely that they were not yet entirely flightless at that time, as flightless birds have generally low resilience to the breakdown of trophic webs which follows the initial phase of mass extinctions because of their below-average dispersal capabilities (see also Flightless Cormorant).



The oldest known fossil penguin species is Waimanu manneringi, which lived in the early Paleocene epoch of New Zealand, or about 62 mya (Slack et al. 2006). While they were not as well adapted to aquatic life as modern penguins, Waimanu were generally loon-like birds but already flightless, with short wings adapted for deep diving. They swam on the surface using mainly their feet, but the wings were - as opposed to most other diving birds, living and extinct - already adapting to underwater locomotion.

Perudyptes from northern Peru was dated to 42 mya. An unnamed fossil from Argentina proves that by the Bartonian (Middle Eocene), some 39-38 mya 
Contra Baker et al. (2006). ,
primitive penguins had spread to South America and were in the process of expanding into Atlantic waters (Clarke et al. 2003).



During the Late Eocene and the Early Oligocene (40-30 mya), some lineages of gigantic penguins existed. Nordenskjoeld's Giant Penguin was the tallest, growing nearly 1.80 meters (6 ft) tall. The New Zealand Giant Penguin was probably the heaviest, weighing 80 kg or more. Both were found on New Zealand, the former also in the Antarctic farther eastwards.

Traditionally, most extinct species of penguins, giant or small, had been placed in the paraphyletic subfamily called Palaeeudyptinae. More recently, with new taxa being discovered and placed in the phylogeny if possible, it is becoming accepted that there were at least 2 major extinct lineages. One or two closely related ones occurred in Patagonia, and at least one other - which is or includes the paleeeudyptines as recognized today - occurred on most Antarctic and subantarctic coasts.

But size plasticity seems to have been great at this initial stage of penguin radiation: on Seymour Island, Antarctica, for example, around ten known species of penguins ranging from medium to huge size apparently coexisted some 35 mya during the Priabonian (Late Eocene) (Jadwiszczak 2006). It is not even known whether the gigantic palaeeudyptines constitute a monophyletic lineage, or whether gigantism was evolved independently in a much restricted Palaeeudyptinae and the Anthropornithinae - were they considered valid -, or whether there was a wide size range present in the Palaeeudyptinae as delimited as usually done these days (i.e., including Anthropornis nordenskjoeldi) (Ksepka et al. 2006).  The oldest well-described giant penguin, the 5-foot-tall Icadyptes salasi, actually occurred as far north as northern Peru about 36 mya.

In any case, the gigantic penguins had disappeared by the end of the Paleogene, around 25 mya. Interestingly, their decline and disappearance coincides with the spread of the Squalodontoidea and other primitive, fish-eating toothed whales, which certainly competed with them for food, and were ultimately more successful (Baker et al. 2006). A new lineage, the Paraptenodytes which includes smaller but decidedly stout-legged forms, had already arisen in southernmost South America by that time. The early Neogene saw the emergence of yet another morphotype in the same area, the similarly-sized but more gracile Palaeospheniscinae, as well as the radiation which gave rise to the penguin biodiversity of our time.



Modern penguins consititute two undisputed clades and another two more basal genera with more ambiguous relationships (Bertelli & Giannini 2005). The origin of the Spheniscinae lies probably in the latest Paleogene, and geographically it must have been much the same as the general area in which the order evolved: the oceans between the Australia-New Zealand region and the Antarctic (Baker et al. 2006). Presumedly diverging from other penguins around 40 mya (Baker et al. 2006), it seems that the Spheniscinae were for quite some time limited to their ancestral area, as the well-researched deposits of the Antarctic Peninsula and Patagonia have not yielded Paleogene fossils of the subfamily. Also, the earliest spheniscine lineages are those with the most southern distribution.

The genus Aptenodytes appears to be the basalmost divergence among living penguins; they have bright yellow-orange neck, breast, and bill patches, incubate by placing their eggs on their feet, and when they hatch, they are almost naked. This genus has a distribution centered  on the Antarctic coasts and barely extends to some subantarctic islands today.

Pygoscelis contains species with a fairly simple black-and-white head pattern; their distribution is intermediate, centered on Antarctic coasts but extending somewhat northwards from there. In external morphology, these apparently still resemble the common ancestor of the Spheniscinae, as Aptenodytes' autapomorphies are in most cases fairly pronounced adaptations related to that genus' extreme habitat conditions. As the former genus, Pygoscelis seems to have diverged during the Bartonian 
In fact, it is fairly likely that during the Bartonian, there was a near-synchronous but allopatric split between the ancestors of Aptenodytes, Pygoscelis, and the common ancestor of all remaining genera (Baker et al. 2006). ,
but the range expansion and radiation which lead to the present-day diversity probably did not occur until much later, around the Burdigalian stage of the Early Miocene, roughly 20-15 mya (Baker et al. 2006).

The genera Spheniscus and Eudyptula contain species with a mostly subantarctic distribution centered on South America; some, however, range quite far northwards. They all lack carotenoid coloration, and the former genus has a conspicuous banded head pattern; they are unique among living penguins in nesting in burrows. This group probably radiated eastwards with the Antarctic Circumpolar Current out of the ancestral range of modern penguins throughout the Chattian (Late Oligocene), starting approximately 28 mya (Baker et al. 2006). While the two genera separated during this time, the present-day diversity is the result of a Pliocene radiation, taking place some 4-2 mya (Baker et al. 2006).

The Megadyptes - Eudyptes clade occurs at similar latitudes (though not as far north as the Galapagos Penguin), has its highest diversity in the New Zealand region, and represent a westward dispersal. They are characterized by hairy yellow ornamental head feathers; their bills are at least partly red. These two genera diverged apparently in the Middle Miocene (Langhian, roughly 15-14 mya), but again, the living species of Eudyptes are the product of a later radiation, stretching from about the late Tortonian (Late Miocene, 8 mya) to the end of the Pliocene (Baker et al. 2006).

It is most interesting to note that the geographical and temporal pattern or spheniscine evolution corresponds closely to two episodes of global cooling documented in the paleoclimatic record (Baker et al. 2006). The emergence of the subantarctic lineage at the end of the Bartonian corresponds with the onset of the slow period of cooling that eventually led to the ice ages some 35 million years later. With habitat on the Antarctic coasts declining, by the Priabonian more hospitable conditions for most penguins existed in the subantarctic regions rather than in Antarctica itself. Notably, the cold Antarctic Circumpolar Current also started as a continuous circumpolar flow only around 30 mya, on the one hand forcing the Antarctic cooling, and on the other facilitating the eastward expansion of Spheniscus to South America and eventually beyond (Baker et al. 2006).

Later, an interspersed period of slight warming was ended by the Middle Miocene Climate Transition, a sharp drop in global average temperature from 14 to 12 mya, and similar abrupt cooling events followed at 8 mya and 4 mya; by the end of the Tortonian, the Antarctic ice sheet was already much like today in volume and extent. The emergence of most of today's subantarctic penguin species almost certainly was caused by this sequence of Neogene climate shifts.



Penguin ancestry beyond Waimanu remains unknown and not well resolved by molecular or morphological analyses. The latter tend to be confounded by the strong adaptive autapomorphies of the Sphenisciformes; a sometimes perceived fairly close relationship between penguins and grebes is almost certainly an error based on both groups' strong diving adaptations, which are homoplasies. On the other hand, different DNA sequence datasets do not agree in detail with each other either.

What seems clear is that penguins belong to a clade of Neoaves (living birds except paleognaths and fowl) which comprises what is sometimes called "higher waterbirds" to distinguish them from the more ancient waterfowl. This group contains such birds as storks, rails, and the seabirds, with the possible exception of the Charadriiformes (Fain & Houde 2004).

Inside this group, penguin relationships are far less clear. Depending on the analysis and dataset, a close relationship to Ciconiiformes (e.g. Slack et al. 2006) or to Procellariiformes (Baker et al. 2006) has been suggested. Some (e.g. Mayr 2005) think the penguin-like plotopterids (usually considered relatives of anhingas and cormorants) may actually be a sister group of the penguins, and that penguins may have ultimately shared a common ancestor with the Pelecaniformes and consequently would have to be included in that order, or that the plotopterids were not as close to other pelecaniforms as generally assumed, which would necessitate splitting the traditional Pelecaniformes in three.

The Auk of the Northern Hemisphere is superficially similar to penguins, they are not related to the penguins at all, but considered by some to be a product of moderate convergent evolution   Convergence and divergence in the evolution of aquatic birds by Marcel Van Tuinen, Dave Brian Butvill, John A. W. Kirsch and S. Blair Hedges



The word Penguin is thought by some to derive from the Welsh words pen (head) and gwyn (white),  Oxford English Dictionary. Accessed March 21, 2007.  applied to the Great Auk, which had white spots in front of its eyes (although its head was black), or from an island off Newfoundland known as Pengwyn, due to a large white rock. (In the latter case, the name may also have come from Breton.) This theory is supported by the fact that penguins look remarkably like Great Auks in general shape.

It is also possible that penguin comes from the Latin pinguis, “fat”. This is supported by the fact that the corresponding words in most other languages (e.g., French pingouin, German Pinguin) have i instead of e as the first vowel.  However, a Welsh 'i' is often sound-shifted to an 'e' in the English language, .

Another theory states that the word is an alteration of “pen-wing”, with reference to the rudimentary wings of both Great Auks and penguins, but there is no evidence for this.



Tux the Linux kernel mascot

Penguins are popular around the world, primarily for their unusually upright, waddling pace and (compared to other birds) lack of fear of humans. Their striking black and white plumage is often likened to a tuxedo suit. Perhaps in reaction to this cutesy stereotype, fictional penguins are occasionally presented as grouchy or even sinister. Penguins have also been the subject of many books and documentary films such as Happy Feet and Surf's Up, both CGI-Animated Animal Adventure Films, March of the Penguins, a documentary based on the migration process of Emperors, and a parody film entitled Farce of the Penguins. Mistakenly, some artists and writers have penguins based in the North Pole.  This is incorrect as there are almost no wild penguins in the northern hemisphere, and those only barely (northernmost of the Galápagos). Penguins have also found their way into a number of cartoons and television dramas, perhaps the most notable of these is Pingu - created by Silvio Mazzola in 1986 and covering more than 100 short episodes.





Aptenodytes forsteri

Aptenodytes patagonicus

Pygoscelis antarctica

Pygoscelis papua

Eudyptes schlegeli

Eudyptes chrysocome

Eudyptes pachyrhynchus

Eudyptes robustus

Eudyptes chrysolophus

Megadyptes antipodes 

Eudyptula minor

Spheniscus demersus

Spheniscus mendiculus

Spheniscus humboldti

Spheniscus magellanicus

Pygoscelis adeliae at iceberg in Ross Sea,  Antarctica

Aptenodytes forsteri (a parent with a chick)

Aptenodytes forsteri (a parent with a chick and lonely chick behind)

Aptenodytes forsteri - a chick















* Marples, B. J. (1962): Observations on the history of penguins. In: Leeper, G. W. (ed.), The evolution of living organisms. Melbourne, Melbourne University Press: 408-416.


John_Adams



John Adams, Jr. (October 30,1735   July 4, 1826)  was the second President of the United States (1797 1801). He also served as America's first Vice President (1789 1797). He was defeated for re-election in the "Revolution of 1800" by Thomas Jefferson. Adams was also the first President to reside in the newly built White House in Washington, D.C., which was completed in 1800.

Adams, a sponsor of the American Revolution in Massachusetts, was a driving force for independence in 1776; Jefferson called him the "Colossus of Independence". He represented the Continental Congress in Europe. He was a major negotiator of the eventual peace treaty with Great Britain, and chiefly responsible for obtaining the loans from the Amsterdam money market necessary for the conduct of the Revolution. His prestige secured his two elections as Washington's Vice President and his election to succeed him.   As President, he was frustrated by battles inside his own Federalist party against a faction led by Alexander Hamilton, but he broke with them to avert a major conflict with France in 1798, during the Quasi-War crisis. He became the founder of an important family of politicians, diplomats and historians, and in recent years his reputation has improved.



Birthplace of John Adams, Quincy, Massachusetts.
John Adams was the oldest of three brothers, born on October 30, 1735 (October 19, 1735 by the Old Style, Julian calendar), in Braintree, Massachusetts, though in an area which became part of Quincy, Massachusetts in 1792. His birthplace is now part of Adams National Historical Park. His father, a farmer and a Deacon, also named John (1690-1761), was a fourth-generation descendant of Henry Adams, who immigrated from Barton St David, Somerset, England, to Massachusetts Bay Colony in about 1636, from a Welsh male line called Ap Adam.  /ref> His mother was Susanna Boylston Adams. Ferling (1992) ch 1  Who is a descendant of the Boylstons of Brookline, one of the colony's most vigorous and successful families.

Young Adams went to Harvard College at age sixteen (in 1751). MSN Encarta, John Adams  His father expected him to become a minister, but Adams had doubts.  After graduating in 1755, he taught school for a few years in Worcester, allowing himself time to think about his career choice.  After much reflection, he decided to become a lawyer, and studied law in the office of James Putnam, a prominent lawyer in Worcester. In 1758, he was admitted to the bar. From an early age, he developed the habit of writing descriptions of events and impressions of men.  These litter his diary.  He put the skill to good use as a lawyer, often recording cases he observed so that he could study and reflect upon them.  His report of the 1761 argument of James Otis in the superior court of Massachusetts as to the legality of Writs of Assistance is a good example. Otis’s argument inspired Adams with zeal for the cause of the American colonies.  Ferling (1992) ch 2

In 1764, Adams married Abigail Smith (1744–1818), the daughter of a Congregational minister,Rev. William Smith, at Weymouth, Massachusetts. Their children were Abigail (1765-1813); future president John Quincy (1767-1848); Susanna (1768–1770); Charles (1770-1800); Thomas Boylston (1772-1832); and Elizabeth (1775) who was stillborn.

Adams was not a popular leader like his second cousin, Samuel Adams; instead, his influence emerged through his work as a constitutional lawyer and his intense analysis of historical examples, Ferling (1992) p 117  together with his thorough knowledge of the law and his dedication to the principles of republicanism. Adams often found his inborn contentiousness to be a restraint in his political career.

Adams wanted to secure approval from the people, and he saw his chance in the British/colonial conflict. He became well known for his essays and energetic resolutions against British taxation and regulation. In 1774 Massachusetts sent him to the Continental Congress. In 1775 war broke out between the colonies and Great Britain. Adams was one of the first few delegates to recognize that a compromise with the British was pointless. In 1776 he worked hard to break away from Britain by using a formal declaration of independence. On July 2, 1776 Congress voted for the resolution, "these colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states."  Two days later, they passed the Declaration of Independence.



johna.jpg


Adams first rose to prominence as an opponent of the Stamp Act of 1765. In that year, he drafted the instructions which were sent by the inhabitants of Braintree to its representatives in the Massachusetts legislature, and which served as a model for other towns to draw up instructions to their representatives. In August 1765, he anonymously contributed four notable articles to the Boston Gazette (republished in The London Chronicle in 1768 as True Sentiments of America and also known as A Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law).  In the letter he suggested that there was a connection between the Protestant ideas that Adams' Puritan ancestors brought to New England and the ideas that suggested they resist the Stamp Act.  In the former he explained that the opposition of the colonies to the Stamp Act was because the Stamp Act deprived the American colonists of two basic rights guaranteed to all Englishmen, and which all free men deserved: rights to be taxed only by consent and to be tried only by a jury of one's peers.  The "Braintree Instructions" were a succinct and forthright defense of colonial rights and liberties, while the Dissertation was an essay in political education.

In December 1765, he delivered a speech before the governor and council in which he pronounced the Stamp Act invalid on the ground that Massachusetts, being without representation in Parliament, had not assented to it.  Ferling (1992) pp 53-63



In 1770, a street confrontation resulted in British soldiers killing four civilians in what became known as the Boston Massacre. The soldiers involved, who were arrested on criminal charges, had trouble finding legal counsel.  Finally, they asked Adams to defend them.  Although he feared it would hurt his reputation, he agreed. One of the soldiers, Captain Thomas Preston gave Adams a symbolic "single guinea" as a retaining fee, Chinard, John Adams, 58-60  the only fee he received in the case. Or, as stated in the biography of John Adams by David McCullough, Adams received nothing more than a retainer of eighteen guineas. McCullough, John Adams, pg. 66

Six of the soldiers were acquitted.  Two who had fired directly into the crowd were charged with murder but were convicted only of manslaughter.

Despite his previous misgivings, Adams was elected to the Massachusetts General Court (the colonial legislature) in June of 1770, while still in preparation for the trial.




In 1772, Massachusetts Governor Thomas Hutchinson announced that he and his judges would no longer need their salaries paid by the Massachusetts legislature, because the Crown would henceforth assume payment drawn from customs revenues. Boston radicals protested and asked Adams to explain their objections.  In "Two Replies of the Massachusetts House of Representatives to Governor Hutchinson" Adams argued that the colonists had never been under the sovereignty of Parliament. Their original charter was with the person of the king and their allegiance was only to him.  If a workable line could not be drawn between parliamentary sovereignty and the total independence of the colonies, he continued, the colonies would have no other choice but to choose independence.

In Novanglus; or, A History of the Dispute with America, From Its Origin, in 1754, to the Present Time Adams attacked some essays by Daniel Leonard that defended Hutchinson's arguments for the absolute authority of Parliament over the colonies. In Novanglus Adams gave a point-by-point refutation of Leonard's essays, and then provided one of the most extensive and learned arguments made by the colonists against British imperial policy. It was a systematic attempt by Adams to describe the origins, nature, and jurisdiction of the unwritten British constitution. Adams used his wide knowledge of English and colonial legal history to show the provincial legislatures were fully sovereign over their own internal affairs, and that the colonies were connected to Great Britain only through the King.



Massachusetts sent Adams to the first and second Continental Congresses in 1774 and from 1775 to 1778.  In 1775 he was also appointed the chief judge of the Massachusetts Superior Court.  In June 1775, with a view of promoting the union of the colonies, he nominated George Washington of Virginia as commander-in-chief of the army then assembled around Boston. His influence in Congress was great, and almost from the beginning, he sought permanent separation from Britain. On October 5, 1775, Congress created the first of a series of committees to study naval matters.

On May 15, 1776 the Continental Congress, in response to escalating hostilities which had climaxed a year prior at Lexington and Concord, urged that the states begin constructing their own constitutions.

John Trumbull's famous painting depicts the five-man drafting committee presenting their work to the Congress. John Adams is standing in the center of the painting.
Today, the Declaration of Independence is remembered as the great revolutionary act, but Adams and most of his contemporaries saw the Declaration as a mere formality. The resolution to draft independent constitutions was, as Adams put it, "independence itself."  Ferling (1992) ch 8 p 146

Over the next decade, Americans from every state gathered and deliberated on new governing documents. As radical as it was to actually write constitutions (prior convention suggested that a society's form of government needn't be codified, nor should its organic law be written down in a single document), what was equally radical was the nature of American political thought as the summer of 1776 dawned.  Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1993)



At that time several Congressmen turned to Adams for advice about framing new governments.  Adams tired of repeating the same thing, and published the pamphlet Thoughts on Government (1776), which was subsequently influential in the writing of many state constitutions. Many historians argue that Thoughts on Government should be read as an articulation of the classical theory of mixed government.  Adams contended that social classes exist in every political society, and that a good government must accept that reality. For centuries, dating back to Aristotle, a mixed regime balancing monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, or the monarch, nobles, and people was required to preserve order and liberty.  Ferling (1992) pp 155-7, 213-5

Using the tools of Republicanism in the United States the patriots believed it was corrupt and nefarious aristocrats, in the English Parliament and stationed in America, who were guilty of the British assault on American liberty.  Unlike others, Adams thought that the definition of a republic had to do with its ends, rather than its means.  He wrote in Thoughts on Government, "there is no good government but what is republican. That the only valuable part of the British constitution is so; because the very definition of a republic is 'an empire of laws, and not of men.'"  Thoughts on Government defended bicameralism, for "a single assembly is liable to all the vices, follies, and frailties of an individual." Thoughts on Government, Works of John Adams, IV:195  He also suggested that the executive should be independent, as should the judiciary.  Thoughts on Government' was enormously influential and was referenced as an authority in every state-constitution writing hall.



On June 7, 1776, Adams seconded the resolution introduced by Richard Henry Lee that "these colonies are, and of a right ought to be, free and independent states," acting as champion of these resolutions before the Congress until their adoption on July 2, 1776.  Ferling (1992) ch 8. An 1813 letter by Adams, in which he said that one-third of the people supported the revolution, refers to the French revolution in the 1790s.

He was appointed on a committee with Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston and Roger Sherman, to draft a Declaration of Independence. Although that document was largely drafted by Jefferson, Adams occupied the foremost place in the debate on its adoption. He deferred the writing to Jefferson believing it would be better received having been written by him. Adams believed Jefferson wrote profoundly better than any man in Congress, and he himself was "obnoxious and disliked." Many years later, Jefferson hailed Adams as, "The Colossus of that Congress the great pillar of support to the Declaration of Independence, and its ablest advocate and champion on the floor of the House." Lipscomb & Bergh, eds. Writings of Thomas Jefferson (1903), vol 13, p xxiv  In 1777, Adams resigned his seat on the Massachusetts Superior Court to serve as the head of the Board of War and Ordinance, as well as many other important committees.  Marquis 1607-1896 
John Adams, as depicted on a two-cent American president postage stamp.



Congress chose Adams to represent the fledgling union in Europe in 1777, and again in 1779. On the second trip, he was appointed as minister plenipotentiary charged with the mission of negotiating a treaty of peace and a treaty of commerce with Great Britain; he went to Europe in September 1779. The French government, however, did not approve of Adams’s appointment and subsequently, on the insistence of the French foreign minister, the Comte de Vergennes, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, John Jay and Henry Laurens were appointed to cooperate with Adams. In the event Jay, Adams and Franklin played the major part in the negotiations. Overruling Franklin, Jay and Adams decided not to consult with France; instead, they dealt directly with the British commissioners.  Ferling (1992) ch 11-12

Throughout the negotiations, Adams was especially determined that the right of the United States to the fisheries along the Atlantic coast should be recognized. The American negotiators were able to secure a favorable treaty, which gave Americans ownership of all lands east of the Mississippi, except Florida, which was transferred to Spain as its reward. The treaty was signed on November 30, 1782.

After these negotiations began, Adams had spent some time as the ambassador in the Netherlands, then the only other well-functioning Republic in the world.  In July 1780, he had been authorized to execute the duties previously assigned to Laurens. With the aid of the Dutch patriot leader Joan van der Capellen tot den Pol, Adams secured the recognition of the United States as an independent government at The Hague on April 19, 1782. In February 1782 the Frisian states had been the first Dutch province to recognize the United States, while France had been the first European country to grant diplomatic recognition, in 1778).  During this visit, he also negotiated a loan of five million guilders. It was floated by Nicolaas van Staphorst and Wilhelm Willink. Up till 1794 a total of eleven loans were granted in Amsterdam to the United States with a value of 29 million guilders.   In October 1782, a treaty of amity and commerce, the second such treaty between the United States and a foreign power (after the 1778 treaty with France). The house that Adams purchased during this stay in The Netherlands became the first American embassy on foreign soil anywhere in the world.

In 1785, John Adams was appointed the first American minister to the Court of St. James's (that is, ambassador to Great Britain). When he was presented to his former sovereign, George III, the King intimated that he was aware of Adams's lack of confidence in the French government. Adams admitted this, stating: "I must avow to your Majesty that I have no attachment but to my own country.”

Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain referred to this episode in July 7, 1976 at the White House.  She said, "John Adams, America's first Ambassador, said to my ancestor, King George III, that it was his desire to help with the restoration of "the old good nature and the old good humor between our peoples." That restoration has long been made, and the links of language, tradition, and personal contact have maintained it."  See   /ref>



Massachusetts's new constitution, ratified in 1780 and written largely by Adams himself, structured its government most closely on his views of politics and society. Ronald M. Peters. The Massachusetts Constitution of 1780: A Social Compact (1978) p 13 says Adams was its "principal architect."  It was the first constitution written by a special committee and ratified by the people.  It was also the first to feature a bicameral legislature, a clear and distinct executive with a partial (2/3) veto (although he was restrained by an executive council), and a distinct judicial branch.

While in London, Adams published a work entitled A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States (1787). In it he repudiated the views of Turgot and other European writers as to the viciousness of the framework of state governments. Turgot argued that countries that lacked aristocracies needn't have bicameral legislatures.  He thought that  republican governments feature “all authorities into one center, that of the nation.” Turgot to Richard Price, March 22, 1778, in Works of John Adams, IV:279  In the book, Adams suggested that "the rich, the well-born and the able" should be set apart from other men in a senate--that would prevent them from dominating the lower house.  Wood (2006) has maintained that Adams had become intellectually irrelevant by the time the Federal Constitution was ratified. By then, American political thought, transformed by more than a decade of vigorous and searching debate as well as shaping experiential pressures, had abandoned the classical conception of politics which understood government as a mirror of social estates. Americans' new conception of popular sovereignty now saw the people-at-large as the sole possessors of power in the realm.  All agents of the government enjoyed mere portions of the people's power and only for a limited period of time. Adams had completely missed this concept and revealed his continued attachment to the older version of politics. Wood, Revolutionary Characters: What Made the Founders Different (2006) pp 173-202; see also Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1993).   Yet Wood overlooks Adams' peculiar definition of the term "republic," and his support for a constitution ratified by the people. Thompson,1999  He also underplays Adams' belief in checks and balances. "Power must be opposed to power, and interest to interest,” Adams wrote.  Works of John Adams, IV:557  Adams did as much as anyone to put the idea of "checks and balances" on the intellectual map.

Adams never bought a slave and declined on principle to employ slave labor. Littlefield, Daniel C. "John Jay, the Revolutionary Generation, and Slavery." New York History 2000 81(1): p 91-132. ISSN 0146-437X  Abigail Adams opposed slavery and employed free blacks in preference to her father's two domestic slaves. He spoke out against a bill to emancipate slaves in Massachusetts, opposed use of black soldiers in the Revolution, and tried to keep the issue out of national politics.  Ferling (1992) pp 172-3



John Adams, portrait by John Trumbull.
While Washington was the unanimous choice for president, Adams came in second in the electoral college and became Vice President in the presidential election of 1789. He played a minor role in the politics of the early 1790s and was reelected in 1792. Washington never asked Adams for input on policy and legal issues.  Ferling (1992) ch 15

One of the best known Adams quotes concluded of the institution of the Vice Presidency: This is the most unimportant position human ever made. "Wizje Stanów Zjednoczonych w Pismach Ojców Założycieli", Warsaw, 1976  His main task while in this office was presiding over Senate. Most Vice Presidents after him were not regarded as powerful or significant members of Presidential administrations, with some exceptions (such as Martin Van Buren, Richard Nixon, Walter Mondale, Al Gore or Dick Cheney, who were regarded as influential members of their President's teams).

In the first year of Washington's administration, Adams became deeply involved in a month-long Senate controversy over what the official title of the President would be, favoring grandiose titles such as "His Majesty the President" or "His High Mightiness" over the simple "President of the United States" that won the issue. The pomposity of Adams's stance, and his being overweight, led to the nickname "His Rotundity."

As president of the Senate, Adams cast 31 tie-breaking votes—a record that only John C. Calhoun came close to tying, with 28.  Ferling (1992) p 311  His votes protected the president's sole authority over the removal of appointees and influenced the location of the national capital. On at least one occasion, he persuaded senators to vote against legislation that he opposed, and he frequently lectured the Senate on procedural and policy matters. Adams's political views and his active role in the Senate made him a natural target for critics of the Washington administration. Toward the end of his first term, as a result of a threatened resolution that would have silenced him except for procedural and policy matters, he began to exercise more restraint.  When the two political parties formed, he joined the Federalist Party, but never got on well with its dominant leader Alexander Hamilton. Because of Adams's seniority and the need for a northern president, he was elected as the Federalist  nominee for president in 1796, over Thomas Jefferson, the leader of the opposition Democratic-Republican Party. His success was due to peace and prosperity; Washington and Hamilton had averted war with Britain by the Jay Treaty of 1795.  Ferling (1992) pp 316-32

Adams' two terms as Vice President were frustrating experiences for a man of his vigor, intellect, and vanity. He complained to his wife Abigail, "My country has in its wisdom contrived for me the most insignificant office that ever the invention of man contrived or his imagination conceived."




During the presidential campaign of 1796 Adams was the presidential candidate of the Federalist Party and Thomas Pinckney, the Governor of South Carolina, his running mate. The federalists wanted Adams as their presidential candidate to crush Thomas Jefferson's bid. Most federalists would have preferred Hamilton to be a candidate.  Although Hamilton and his followers supported Adams, they also held a grudge against him.  They did consider him to be the lesser of the two evils. However, they thought Adams lacked the seriousness and popularity that had caused Washington to be successful, and also feared that Adams was too vain, opinionated, unpredictable, and stubborn to follow their directions.  Adams' opponents were former Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, who was joined by Senator Aaron Burr of New York on the Democratic-Republican ticket.

As was customary, Adams stayed in his home town of Quincy rather than actively campaign for the Presidency.  He wanted to stay out of what he called the silly and wicked game. His party, however, campaigned for him, while the Republicans campaigned for Jefferson.

It was expected that Adams would dominate the votes in New England, while Jefferson was expected to win in the Southern states. In the end, Adams won the election by a narrow margin of 71 electoral votes to 68 for Jefferson (who became the vice president).



When Adams entered office, he realized that he needed to protect Washington’s policy of staying out of the French and British war. Because the French helped secure American independence from Britain they had greater popularity with America. After the Jay treaty with Great Britain the French became angry and began seizing American merchant ships that were trading with the British. In order for Adams to avoid war he sent a commission to negotiate an understanding with France. In case the negotiation did not work Adams urged the Congress to augment the navy and army.



Presidential Dollar of John Adams

As President Adams followed Washington's lead in making the presidency the example of republican values and stressing civic virtue, he was never implicated in any scandal. Some historians consider his worst mistake to be keeping the old cabinet, which was controlled by Hamilton, instead of installing his own people, confirming Adams's own admission he was a poor politician because he "was unpractised in intrigues for power."  Ferling (1992) ch 16, p 333.  Yet, there are those historians who feel that Adams retention of Washington's cabinet was a statesman-like step to soothe worries about an orderly succession. As Adams himself explained, "I had then no particular object of any of them."  McCullough p 471  That would soon change.
Adams's combative spirit did not always lend itself to presidential decorum, as Adams himself admitted in his old age: "[As president] I refused to suffer in silence. I sighed, sobbed, and groaned, and sometimes screeched and screamed. And I must confess to my shame and sorrow that I sometimes swore." Ellis (1998) p 57

Adams's four years as president (1797 1801) were marked by intense disputes over foreign policy. Britain and France were at war; Adams and the Federalists favored Britain, while Jefferson and the Democratic-Republicans favored France. An undeclared naval war between the U.S. and France, called the Quasi-War, broke out in 1798. The humiliation of the XYZ Affair, in which the French demanded huge bribes before any discussions could begin, led to serious threats of full-scale war with France and embarrassed the Jeffersonians, who were friends to France. The Federalists built up the army under George Washington and Alexander Hamilton, built warships, such as the USS Constitution, and raised taxes. They cracked down on political immigrants and domestic opponents with the Alien and Sedition Acts, which were signed by Adams in 1798.

These Acts were composed of four separate and distinct units:

These 4 acts were brought about to suppress Republican opposition. The Naturalization Act doubled the period required to naturalize the foreign born to American citizenship to 14 years. Since most immigrants voted republican they thought by initiating this act it would decrease the proportion of people who voted republican. 
The Alien Friends Act and the Alien Enemies Act allowed the president to deport any foreigner that he  thought was dangerous to the country. 
The Sedition Act criminalized anyone who publicly criticized the federal government. Some of the punishments included 2-5 years in prison and fines of $2,000 to $5,000. Adams had not designed or promoted any of these acts but he did sign them into law because he had no problem punishing those who abused the government.

Those Acts, and the high-profile prosecution of a number of newspaper editors and one Congressman by the Federalists, became highly controversial. Some historians have noted that the Alien and Sedition Acts were relatively rarely enforced, as only 10 convictions under the Sedition Act have been identified and as Adams never signed a deportation order, and that the furor over the Alien and Sedition Acts was mainly stirred up by the Democratic-Republicans. However, other historians emphasize that the Acts were highly controversial from the outset, resulted in many aliens leaving the country voluntarily, and created an atmosphere where opposing the Federalists, even on the floor of Congress, could and did result in prosecution. The election of 1800 became a bitter and volatile battle, with each side expressing extraordinary fear of the other party and its policies.  Ferling (1992) ch 17

The deep division in the Federalist party came on the army issue. Adams was forced to name Washington as commander of the new army, and Washington demanded that Hamilton be given the second position. Adams reluctantly gave in. Major General Hamilton virtually took control of the War department. The rift between Adams and the High Federalists (as Adams's opponents were called) grew wider. The High Federalists refused to consult Adams over the key legislation of 1798; they changed the defense measures which he had called for, demanded that Hamilton control the army, and refused to recognize the necessity of giving key Democratic-Republicans (like Aaron Burr) senior positions in the army (which Adams wanted to do in order to gain some Democratic-Republican support). By building a large standing army the High Federalists raised popular alarms and played into the hands of the Democratic-Republicans. They also alienated Adams and his large personal following. They shortsightedly viewed the Federalist party as their own tool and ignored the need to pull together the entire nation in the face of war with France. Kurtz (1967) yyoaoaoaschwing! p 331

For long stretches, Adams withdrew to his home in Massachusetts. In February 1799, Adams stunned the country by sending diplomat William Vans Murray on a peace mission to France. Napoleon, realizing the animosity of the United States was doing no good, signaled his readiness for friendly relations. The Treaty of Alliance of 1778 was superseded and the United States could now be free of foreign entanglements, as Washington advised in his own Farewell Letter. Adams avoided war, but deeply split his own party in the process. He brought in John Marshall as Secretary of State and demobilized the emergency army.  Ferling (1992) ch 18




The death of Washington, in 1799, weakened the Federalists, as they lost the one man who symbolized and united the party.  In the presidential election of 1800, Adams ran and lost the electoral vote narrowly. Among the causes of his defeat was distrust of him by "High Federalists" led by Hamilton, the popular disapproval of the Alien and Sedition Acts, the popularity of his opponent, Thomas Jefferson, and the effective politicking of Aaron Burr in New York State, where the legislature (which selected the electoral college) shifted from Federalist to Republican on the basis of a few wards in New York City controlled by Burr's machine.  Ferling (1992) ch 19; Ferling (2004)

In the election of 1800 John Adams and his running mate, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney went against the Republican duo of Jefferson and Burr. Hamilton tried his hardest to sabotage Adams campaign in hopes of boosting Pinckney's chances of winning the presidency. In the end, Adams lost narrowly to Jefferson by 65 to 73 electoral votes.



As his term was expiring, Adams appointed a series of judges, called the "Midnight Judges" because most of them were formally appointed days before the presidential term expired. Most of the judges were eventually unseated when the Jeffersonians abolished their offices. But John Marshall remained, and his long tenure as Chief Justice of the United States represents the most lasting influence of the Federalists, as Marshall refashioned the Constitution into a nationalizing force and established the Judicial Branch as the equal of the Executive and Legislative branches. Ferling (1992) p 409











Adams appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:




None



Portrait of an elderly John Adams by Gilbert Stuart (1823).
Following his 1800 defeat, Adams retired into private life. Depressed when he left office, he did not attend Jefferson's inauguration.  He went back to farming in the Quincy area.

In 1812, Adams reconciled with Jefferson. Their mutual friend Benjamin Rush, who had been corresponding with both, encouraged Adams to reach out to Jefferson. Adams sent a brief note to Jefferson, which resulted in a resumption of their friendship, and initiated a correspondence which lasted the rest of their lives. Their letters are rich in insight into both the period and the minds of the two Presidents and revolutionary leaders. Their correspondence lasted fourteen years, and consisted of 158 letters.  Cappon (1988)   It was in these years that they two men discussed "natural aristocracy."  Jefferson said that "“The natural aristocracy I consider as the most precious gift of nature for the instruction, the trusts, and government of society.  And indeed it would have been inconsistent in creation to have formed man for the social state, and not to have provided virtue and wisdom enough to manage the concerns of society. May we not even say that the form of government is best which provides most effectually for a pure selection of these natural aristoi into the offices of government?" Cappon, ed., 387  Adams wondered if it ever would be so clear who these people were, "Your distinction between natural and artificial aristocracy does not appear to me well founded.  Birth and wealth are conferred on some men as imperiously by nature, as genius, strength, or beauty. . . . When aristocracies, are established by human laws and honour wealth and power are made hereditary by municipal laws and political institutions, then I acknowledge artificial aristocracy to commence."  Cappon, ed. 400   It would always be true, Adams argued, that fate would bestow influence on some men for reasons other than true wisdom and virtue.  That being the way of nature, he thought such "talents" were natural.  A good government, therefore, had to account for that reality.

Sixteen months before his death, his son, John Quincy Adams, became the sixth President of the United States (1825 1829), the only son of a former President to hold the office until George W. Bush in 2001.

His daughter Abigail ("Nabby") was married to Congressman William Stephens Smith and died of cancer in 1816. His son Charles died as an alcoholic in 1800. His son Thomas and his family lived with Adams and Louisa Smith (Abigail's niece by her brother William) to the end of Adams's life.  Ferling (1992) ch 20



Tombs of Presidents John Adams (distance) and John Quincy Adams (foreground) and their wives, in a family crypt beneath the United First Parish Church. 
On July 4, 1826, the 50th anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, Adams died at his home in Quincy. His last words are often quoted as "Thomas Jefferson survives." Only the words "Thomas Jefferson" were clearly intelligible among his last, however.  Jefferson Still Survives. Retrieved on 2006-12-26.  Adams was unaware that Jefferson, his great political rival — and later friend and correspondent — had died a few hours earlier on that same day.United First Parish Church The fact that Adams and Jefferson, both of whom had been so instrumental in creating the Declaration of Independence, died on the fiftieth anniversary of the date of its publication, is one of the more remarkable coincidences in history.

His crypt lies at United First Parish Church (also known as the Church of the Presidents) in Quincy.  Until his record was broken by Ronald Reagan in 2001, he was the nation's longest-living President (90 years, 247 days) maintaining that record for 175 years.  The record is currently held by former President Gerald Ford, who served less than one term, and who died December 26, 2006 at 93 years, 165 days.

John Adams remains the longest-lived person ever elected to both of the highest offices in the United States.



Adams was raised a Congregationalist, becoming a Unitarian at a time when most of the Congregational churches around Boston were turning to Unitarianism.  Everett (1966) argues that Adams was not a deist, but he used deistic terms in his speeches and writing. He believed in the essential goodness of the creation, but did not believe in the divinity of Christ or that God intervened in the affairs of individuals. Although not anti-clerical, he advocated the separation of church and state. He also believed that regular church service was beneficial to man's moral sense. Everett concludes that "Adams strove for a religion based on a common sense sort of reasonableness" and maintained that religion must change and evolve toward perfection. Robert B. Everett, "The Mature Religious Thought of John Adams," Proceedings of the South Carolina Historical Association (1966), p 49-57; [ISSN 0361-6207].

Adams often railed against what he saw as overclaiming of authority by the Catholic church. See  TeachingAmericanHistory.org: " A Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law", John Adams, 1765

In 1796, Adams denounced the deism of political opponent Thomas Paine, saying, "The Christian religion is, above all the religions that ever prevailed or existed in ancient or modern times, the religion of wisdom, virtue, equity and humanity, let the Blackguard Paine say what he will." The Works of John Adams (1854), vol III, p 421, diary entry for July 26, 1796.

The Unitarian Universalist Historical Society sheds some light on Adams’s religious beliefs.    They point out that Adams was clearly no atheist by quoting from his letter to Benjamin Rush, an early promoter of Universalist thought, “I have attended public worship in all countries and with all sects and believe them all much better than no religion, though I have not thought myself obliged to believe all I heard.” The Society also relates how Rush reconciled Adams to his former friend Thomas Jefferson in 1812, after many bitter political battles. This resulted in correspondence between Adams and Jefferson about many topics, including philosophy and religion.  In one of these communications, Adams told Jefferson, "The Ten Commandments and the Sermon on the Mount contain my religion." In another letter, Adams reveals his sincere devotion to God, “My Adoration of the Author of the Universe is too profound and too sincere. The Love of God and his Creation; delight, Joy, Tryumph, Exaltation in my own existence, tho' but an Atom, a molecule Organique, in the Universe, are my religion.” He continues by revealing his Universalist sympathies, rejection of orthodox Christian dogma, and his personal belief that he was a true Christian for not accepting such dogma, “Howl, Snarl, bite, Ye Calvinistick! Ye Athanasian Divines, if You will. Ye will say, I am no Christian: I say Ye are no Christians: and there the Account is ballanced. Yet I believe all the honest men among you, are Christians in my Sense of the Word." The Society also demonstrates that Adams rejected orthodox Christian doctrines of the trinity, predestination, yet equated human understanding and the human conscience to “celestial communication” or personal revelation from God. It is also shown that Adams held a strong conviction in life after death or otherwise, as he explained, “you might be ashamed of your Maker.”



* Brown, Ralph A. The Presidency of John Adams. (1988). Political narrative.
* Ellis, Joseph J. Passionate Sage: The Character and Legacy of John Adams (1993), interpretative essay by Pulitzer prize winning scholar.
* Ferling, John. Adams vs. Jefferson: The Tumultuous Election of 1800. (2004), narrative history of the election .
* Knollenberg, Bernard. Growth of the American Revolution: 1766-1775,(2003).  Online edition.
* Kurtz, Stephen G. The Presidency of John Adams: The Collapse of Federalism, 1795-1800 (1957). Detailed political narrative.
* McCullough, David. John Adams. (2002). Best-selling popular biography, stressing Adams's character and his marriage with Abigail over his ideas and constitutional thoughts. Winner of the 2002 Pulitzer Prize in Biography.
* Miller, John C. The Federalist Era: 1789-1801. (1960). Thorough survey of politics in decade.
* Ryerson, Richard Alan, ed. John Adams and the Founding of the Republic (2001). Essays by scholars:  "John Adams and the Massachusetts Provincial Elite," by William Pencak; "Before Fame: Young John Adams and Thomas Jefferson," by John Ferling; "John Adams and the 'Bolder Plan,'" by Gregg L. Lint; "In the Shadow of Washington: John Adams as Vice President," by Jack D. Warren; "The Presidential Election of 1796," by Joanne B. Freeman; "The Disenchantment of a Radical Whig: John Adams Reckons with Free Speech," by Richard D. Brown; "'Splendid Misery': Abigail Adams as First Lady," by Edith B. Gelles; "John Adams and the Science of Politics," by C. Bradley Thompson; and "Presidents as Historians: John Adams and Thomas Jefferson," by Herbert Sloan.
* Sharp, James. American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis. (1995), detailed political narrative of 1790s.
* Thompson, C. Bradley. John Adams and the Spirit of Liberty. (1998). Analysis of Adams's political thought; insists Adams was the greatest political thinker among the Founding Generation and anticipated many of the ideas in The Federalist.


* Butterfield, L. H. et al., eds., The Adams Papers (1961- ). Multivolume letterpress edition of all letters to and from major members of the Adams family, plus their diaries; still incomplete .
* Cappon, Lester J. ed. The Adams-Jefferson Letters: The Complete Correspondence Between Thomas Jefferson and Abigail and John Adams (1988).
* Carey, George W., ed. The Political Writings of John Adams. (2001). Compilation of extracts from Adams's major political writings.
*Brinkley, Alan, and Davis Dyer. The American Presidency. Boston: Houghton Mifflin company, 2004.




*  Adams Family Papers: An electronic archive Captured December 16, 2004.
* The  John Adams Library, housed at the Boston Public Library, contains Adams's personal collection of more than 3,500 volumes in eight languages, many of which are extensively annotated by Adams.

James_Monroe



James Monroe (April 28, 1758 – July 4, 1831) was the fifth President of the United States (1817-1825). His administration was marked by the acquisition of Florida (1819); the Missouri Compromise (1820), in which Missouri was declared a slave state; and the profession of the Monroe Doctrine (1823), declaring U.S. opposition to European interference in the Americas.


The President’s parents, father Spence Monroe (ca. 1727 1774), a woodworker and tobacco farmer, and mother Elizabeth Jones Monroe had significant land holdings but little money. Like his parents, he was a slaveholder. Born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, Monroe went to school at Campbelltown Academy and then the College of William and Mary, both in Virginia.  After graduating from William and Mary in 1776, Monroe fought in the Continental Army, serving with distinction at the Battle of Trenton, where he was shot in his left shoulder. He is depicted holding the flag in the famous painting of Washington Crossing the Delaware. Following his military service, he practiced law in Fredericksburg, Virginia. James Monroe married Elizabeth Kortright on February 16, 1786 at the Trinity Church in New York.

Monroe was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1782 and served in the Continental Congress from 1783 to 1786. As a youthful politician, he joined the anti-Federalists in the Virginia Convention which ratified the Constitution, and in 1790, was elected United States Senator.

After his term in the Senate, Monroe was appointed Minister to France from 1794 to 1796. His appointment there was made difficult as he had strong sympathies for the French Revolution, but dutifully maintained President Washington's strict policy of neutrality between Britiain and France.

Out of office, Monroe returned to practicing law in Virginia until elected governor there, serving from 1799 to 1802.

Under the first Jefferson administration, Monroe was dispatched to France to assist Robert R. Livingston negotiate the Louisiana Purchase. Monroe was then appointed Minister to the Court of St. James (Britain) from 1803 to 1807. In 1806 he negotiated a treaty with Britain to replace the Jay Treaty of 1794, but Jefferson rejected it as unsatisfactory, as the treaty contained no ban on the British practice of impressment of American sailors. As a result, the two nations moved closer toward the War of 1812.

Monroe returned to the Virginia House of Delegates and was elected to another term as governor of Virginia in 1811, but he resigned a few months into the term. He then served as Secretary of State from 1811 to 1814.  When he was appointed to Secretary of War in 1814, he stayed on as the Secretary of State ad interim.  At the war's end in 1815, he was again commissioned as the permanent Secretary of State, and left his position as Secretary of War.  Thus from October 1, 1814 to February 28, 1815, Monroe effectively held the two cabinet posts.  Monroe stayed on as Secretary of State until the end of the James Madison Presidency, and the following day Monroe began his term as the new President of the United States.



Following the War of 1812, Monroe was elected president in the election of 1816, and re-elected in 1820. In both those elections Monroe ran nearly uncontested.  To detail, well prepared on most issues, non-partisan in spirit, and above all pragmatic, Monroe managed his presidential duties well.  He made strong Cabinet choices, naming a southerner, John C. Calhoun, as Secretary of War, and a northerner, John Quincy Adams, as Secretary of State. Only Henry Clay's refusal kept Monroe from adding an outstanding westerner.  Most appointments went to deserving Democratic-Republicans, but he did not try to use them to build the party's base.  Indeed, he allowed the base to decay, which reduced tensions and led to the naming of his era as the "Era of Good Feelings". To build good will, he made two long tours in 1817. Frequent stops allowed innumerable ceremonies of welcome and good will. The Federalist Party dwindled and eventually died out, starting with the Hartford Convention. Practically every politician belonged to the Democratic-Republican Party, but the party lost its vitality and organizational integrity. The party's Congressional caucus stopped meeting, and there were no national conventions.

These "good feelings" endured until 1824, when he executed the controversial Monroe Transfer. Monroe, with his popularity undiminished, followed nationalist policies. Across the commitment to nationalism, sectional cracks appeared. The Panic of 1819 caused a painful economic depression. The application for statehood by the Missouri Territory, in 1819, as a slave state failed. An amended bill for gradually eliminating slavery in Missouri precipitated two years of bitter debate in Congress. The Missouri Compromise bill resolved the struggle, pairing Missouri as a slave state with Maine, a free state, and barring slavery north and west of Missouri forever.

Monroe began to formally recognize the young sister republics (the former Spanish colonies) in 1822. He and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams wished to avoid trouble with Spain until it had ceded the Floridas to the U.S., which was done in 1821.

Monroe is probably best known for the Monroe Doctrine, which he delivered in his message to Congress on December 2, 1823. In it, he proclaimed the Americas should be free from future European colonization and free from European interference in sovereign countries' affairs. It further stated the United States' intention to stay neutral in European wars and wars between European powers and their colonies, but to consider any new colonies or interference with independent countries in the Americas as hostile acts toward the United States.

Britain, with its powerful navy, also opposed re-conquest of Latin America and suggested that the United States join in proclaiming "hands off." Ex-Presidents Jefferson and Madison counseled Monroe to accept the offer, but Secretary Adams advised, "It would be more candid ... to avow our principles explicitly to Russia and France, than to come in as a cock-boat in the wake of the British man-of-war." Monroe accepted Adams' advice. Not only must Latin America be left alone, he warned, but also Russia must not encroach southward on the Pacific coast. "... the American continents," he stated, "by the free and independent condition which they have assumed and maintain, are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European Power." Some 20 years after Monroe died in 1831 this became known as the Monroe Doctrine.



Official White House portrait of James Monroe



Monroe appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:





When his presidency expired on March 4, 1825, James Monroe lived at Monroe Hill on the grounds of the University of Virginia.  This university's modern campus was Monroe's family farm from 1788 to 1817, but he had sold it in the first year of his presidency to the new college.  He served on the college's Board of Visitors under Jefferson and then under the second rector and another former President James Madison, until his death.

Monroe had racked up many debts during his years of public life. As a result, he was forced to sell off his Highland Plantation (now called Ash Lawn-Highland; it is owned by his alma mater, the College of William and Mary, which has opened it to the public). Throughout his life, he was not financially solvent, and his wife's poor health made matters worse.  For these reasons, he and his wife lived in Oak Hill until Elizabeth's death on September 23, 1830.



Upon Elizabeth's death in 1830, Monroe moved to New York City to live with his daughter Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur who had married Samuel L. Gouverneur in the first White House wedding.  Monroe died there from heart failure and tuberculosis on July 4, 1831, becoming the third president to die on the 4th of July. His death came 55 years after the U.S. Declaration of Independence was proclaimed and 5 years after the death of Presidents John Adams and Thomas Jefferson. He was originally buried in New York at the Gouverneur family vault in the New York City Marble Cemetery.  Twenty-seven years later in 1858 he was re-interred to the President's Circle at Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia.
Statue of Monroe at Ash Lawn-Highland



"When it comes to Monroe's ...thoughts on religion", Bliss Isely comments in his The Presidents: Men of Faith, "less is known than that of any other President." He burned much of his correspondence with his wife, and no letters survive in which he might have discussed his religious beliefs. Nor did his friends, family or associates write about his beliefs. Letters that do survive, such as ones written on the occasion of the death of his son, contain no discussion of religion.

Monroe was raised in a family that belonged to the Church of England when it was the state church in Virginia, and as an adult frequently attended Episcopalian churches, though there is no record he ever took communion. He has been classified by some historians as a Deist, and he did use deistic language to refer to God. Jefferson had been attacked as an atheist and infidel for his deistic views, but never Monroe.  Unlike Jefferson, Monroe was not anticlerical. [Holmes 2003]




* Apart from George Washington's Washington D.C., James Monroe is the only U.S. President to have had a country's capital city named after him  that of Monrovia in Liberia which was founded by the American Colonization Society, in 1822, as a haven for freed slaves. 
* Monroe was (arguably) the last president to have fought in the Revolutionary War, although Andrew Jackson served as a 13-year-old courier in the Continental Army and was taken as a prisoner of war by the British.
* Monroe is considered to be the president who was in the most paintings; throughout the 1800s he was in over 350.






* Samuel Flagg Bemis, John Quincy Adams and the Foundations of American Foreign Policy (1949), is a standard study of Monroe's foreign policy. 
* George Dangerfield. The Era of Good Feelings (1952). 
* Heidler, David S. "The Politics of National Aggression: Congress and the First Seminole War." Journal of the Early Republic 1993 13(4): 501-530. ISSN 0275-1275 Fulltext: in Jstor. Abstract: Monroe sparked a constitutional controversy when, in 1817, he sent General Andrew Jackson to move against Spanish Florida in order to pursue hostile Seminoles and punish the Spanish for aiding them. News of Jackson's exploits ignited a congressional investigation of the 1st Seminole War. Dominated by Democratic-Republicans, the 15th Congress was generally expansionist and more likely to support the popular Jackson. Ulterior political agendas of many congressmen dismantled partisan and sectional coalitions, so that Jackson's opponents argued weakly and became easily discredited. After much debate, the House of Representatives voted down all resolutions that condemned Jackson in any way, thus implicitly endorsing Monroe's actions and leaving the issue surrounding the role of the executive with respect to war powers unanswered.
* Ernest R. May, The Making of the Monroe Doctrine (1975), argues it was issued to influence the outcome of the presidential election of 1824.
* Dexter Perkins, The Monroe Doctrine, 1823-1826 (1927), the standard monograph about the origins of the doctrine. 
* Scherr, Arthur. "James Monroe on the Presidency and 'Foreign Influence;: from the Virginia Ratifying Convention (1788) to Jefferson's Election (1801)." Mid-America  2002 84(1-3): 145-206. ISSN 0026-2927. Abstract: Analyzes Monroe's concern over untoward foreign influence on the presidency. He was alarmed at Spanish diplomat Diego María de Gardoqui, involving a US attempt to secure the opening of the Mississippi River to American commerce. Here Monroe saw Spain overinfluencing the republic, which could have risked the loss of the Southwest or dominance of the Northeast. Monroe placed faith in a strong presidency and the system of checks and balances. In the 1790s he fretted over an aging George Washington being too heavily influenced by close advisers like Hamilton who was too close to Britain. Monroe opposed the Jay Treaty and was humiliated when Washington criticized for his support of revolutionary France while he was minister to France. He saw foreign and Federalist elements in the genesis of the Quasi War of 1798-1800 and in efforts to keep Thomas Jefferson away from the presidency in 1801. As governor he considered using the Virginia militia to force the outcome in favor of Jefferson. Federalists responded in kind, some seeing Monroe as at best a French dupe and at worst a traitor. Monroe thus contributed to a paranoid style of politics. 
* Scherr, Arthur. "Governor James Monroe and the Southampton Slave Resistance of 1799." Historian 1999 61(3): 557-578. ISSN 0018-2370 Fulltext online in SwetsWise and Ebsco. Abstract: Assesses Monroe's views on slavery as governor of Virginia from 1799 to 1802, emphasizing Monroe's moderate view of slaveholding during a slave uprising in Southampton County in October 1799. Monroe took pains to see that the charged rebels received proper legal treatment, demonstrating a marked concern for their civil rights. He conducted an exhaustive investigation into the incident and saw to it the slaves involved received a fair trial. Although he opposed abolition, Monroe supported African colonization proposals and gradual, compensated emancipation. When the occasion warranted, as in Gabriel Prosser's rebellion of 1800, Monroe took an unpopular position in supporting fair trials and attempting to explain and justify slave actions. In the final analysis, Monroe believed in the eventual demise of slavery.



* Monroe, James. The Political Writings of James Monroe. James P. Lucier, ed. Regnery, 2002. 863 pp.


This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Page semi-protected
Jeff Bezos
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Jeff Bezos
Jeff Bezos at Amazon Spheres Grand Opening in Seattle - 2018 (39074799225) (cropped).jpg
Born	Jeffrey Preston Jorgensen

January 12, 1964 (age 56)
Albuquerque, New Mexico, U.S.
Education	Princeton University (BS)
Occupation	

    BusinessmanMedia proprietorInvestorComputer engineer

Years active	1986–present
Known for	Founder of Amazon and Blue Origin
Net worth	US$151.6 billion (May 2020)[1]
Title	CEO and President of Amazon
Spouse(s)	MacKenzie Tuttle
(m. 1993; div. 2019)
Children	4

Jeffrey Preston Bezos (/ˈbeɪzoʊs/;[a][2] né Jorgensen; born January 12, 1964) is an American industrialist, media proprietor, and investor. He is best known as the founder, CEO, and president of the online retail company Amazon. The first centi-billionaire on the Forbes wealth index, Bezos has been the world's richest person since 2017 and was named the "richest man in modern history" after his net worth increased to $150 billion in July 2018.[3] In September 2018, Forbes described him as "far richer than anyone else on the planet" as he added $1.8 billion to his net worth when Amazon became the second company in history to reach a market cap of $1 trillion.

Born in Albuquerque and raised in Houston and later Miami, Bezos graduated from Princeton University in 1986 with a degree in electrical engineering and computer science. He worked on Wall Street in a variety of related fields from 1986 to early 1994. He founded Amazon in late 1994 on a cross-country road trip from New York City to Seattle. The company began as an online bookstore and has since expanded to a wide variety of other e-commerce products and services, including video and audio streaming, cloud computing, and AI. It is currently the world's largest online sales company, the largest Internet company by revenue, and the world's largest provider of virtual assistants[4] and cloud infrastructure services through its Amazon Web Services branch.

Bezos founded the aerospace manufacturer and sub-orbital spaceflight services company Blue Origin in 2000. A Blue Origin test flight successfully first reached space in 2015, and the company has upcoming plans to begin commercial suborbital human spaceflight.[5] He also purchased the major American newspaper The Washington Post in 2013 for $250 million in cash, and manages many other investments through his Bezos Expeditions venture capital firm.
Contents

    1 Early life
    2 Business career
        2.1 Early career
        2.2 Amazon
        2.3 Blue Origin
        2.4 The Washington Post
        2.5 Bezos Expeditions
    3 Public image
        3.1 Leadership style
    4 Recognition
    5 Wealth
    6 Personal life
    7 Politics
        7.1 Saudi hacking claim
    8 Philanthropy
    9 See also
    10 Notes
    11 References
    12 Sources
    13 Further reading
    14 External links

Early life

Bezos was born Jeffrey Preston Jorgensen in Albuquerque, New Mexico, on January 12, 1964, the son of Jacklyn (née Gise) and Ted Jorgensen.[6] At the time of his birth, his mother was a 17-year-old high school student and his father was a bike shop owner.[7] After his parents divorced, his mother married Cuban immigrant Miguel "Mike" Bezos in April 1968.[8] Shortly after the wedding, Mike adopted four-year-old Jorgensen, whose surname was then changed to Bezos.[9] The family moved to Houston, Texas, where Mike worked as an engineer for Exxon after he received a degree from the University of New Mexico.[10] Bezos attended River Oaks Elementary School in Houston from fourth to sixth grade.[11] Bezos' maternal grandfather was Lawrence Preston Gise, a regional director of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) in Albuquerque.[12] Gise retired early to his family's ranch near Cotulla, Texas, where Bezos would spend many summers in his youth.[10] Bezos would later purchase this ranch and expand it from 25,000 acres (10,117 ha) to 300,000 acres (121,406 ha).[13][14] His maternal grandmother was Mattie Louise Gise (née Strait), through whom he is a cousin of country singer George Strait.[15]

Bezos often displayed scientific interests and technological proficiency, and he once rigged an electric alarm to keep his younger siblings out of his room.[16][17] The family moved to Miami, Florida, where Bezos attended Miami Palmetto High School in nearby Pinecrest, Florida.[18][19] While Bezos was in high school, he worked at McDonald's as a short-order line cook during the breakfast shift.[20] He attended the Student Science Training Program at the University of Florida. He was high school valedictorian, a National Merit Scholar,[21][22] and a Silver Knight Award winner in 1982.[21] In his graduation speech, Bezos told the audience he dreamed of the day when mankind would colonize space. A local newspaper quoted his intention "to get all people off the earth and see it turned into a huge national park".[23] In 1986, he graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University with a 4.2 GPA and a Bachelor of Science in Engineering (BSE) in electrical engineering and computer science; he was also a member of Phi Beta Kappa.[24][25] In addition, he was elected to Tau Beta Pi and was the president of the Princeton chapter of the Students for the Exploration and Development of Space (SEDS).[26][27]
Business career
Early career

After Bezos graduated from Princeton University in 1986, he was offered jobs at Intel, Bell Labs, and Andersen Consulting, among others.[28] He first worked at Fitel, a fintech telecommunications start-up, where he was tasked with building a network for international trade.[29] Bezos was promoted to head of development and director of customer service thereafter.[30] He transitioned into the banking industry when he became a product manager at Bankers Trust. He worked there from 1988 to 1990.[30] He then joined D. E. Shaw & Co, a newly-founded hedge fund with a strong emphasis on mathematical modelling in 1990 and worked there until 1994. Bezos became D. E. Shaw's fourth senior vice-president at the age of 30.[30][28]
Amazon
Main article: Amazon
Bezos (center) at a cooperative for robotics in 2005

In late 1993, Bezos decided to establish an online bookstore.[31] He left his job at D. E. Shaw and founded Amazon in his garage on July 5, 1994, after writing its business plan on a cross-country drive from New York City to Seattle.[32][33] Bezos initially named his new company Cadabra but later changed the name to Amazon after the Amazon River in South America, in part because the name begins with the letter A, which is at the beginning of the alphabet.[34] He accepted an estimated $300,000 from his parents and invested in Amazon.[33] He warned many early investors that there was a 70% chance that Amazon would fail or go bankrupt.[35] Although Amazon was originally an online bookstore, Bezos had always planned to expand to other products.[30][34] Three years after Bezos founded Amazon, he took it public with an initial public offering (IPO).[36] In response to critical reports from Fortune and Barron's, Bezos maintained that the growth of the Internet would overtake competition from larger book retailers such as Borders and Barnes & Noble.[34]
Bezos receives the James Smithson Bicentennial medal in 2016 for his work with Amazon.

In 1998, Bezos diversified into the online sale of music and video, and by the end of the year he had expanded the company's products to include a variety of other consumer goods.[34] Bezos used the $54 million raised during the company's 1997 equity offering to finance aggressive acquisition of smaller competitors.[34] In 2000, Bezos borrowed $2 billion from banks, as its cash balances dipped to only $350 million.[37] In 2002, Bezos led Amazon to launch Amazon Web Services, which compiled data from weather channels and website traffic.[34] In late 2002, rapid spending from Amazon caused it financial distress when revenues stagnated.[38] After the company nearly went bankrupt, he closed distribution centers and laid off 14% of the Amazon workforce.[37] In 2003, Amazon rebounded from financial instability and turned a profit of $400 million.[39] In November 2007, Bezos launched the Amazon Kindle.[40] According to a 2008 Time profile, Bezos wished to create a device that allowed a "flow state" in reading similar to the experience of video games.[41] In 2013, Bezos secured a $600 million contract with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) on behalf of Amazon Web Services.[42] In October of that year, Amazon was recognized as the largest online shopping retailer in the world.[43]

In May 2016, Bezos sold slightly more than one million shares of his holdings in the company for $671 million, the largest sum he had ever raised from selling some of his Amazon stock.[44] On August 4, 2016, Bezos sold another million of his shares for $756.7 million.[45] A year later, Bezos took on 130,000 new employees when he ramped up hiring at company distribution centers.[46] By January 19, 2018, his Amazon stock holdings had appreciated to slightly over $109 billion; months later he began to sell stock to raise cash for other enterprises, in particular, Blue Origin.[47] On January 29, 2018, he was featured in Amazon's Super Bowl commercial.[48] On February 1, 2018, Amazon reported its highest ever profit with quarterly earnings of $2 billion.[49] Due to the growth of Alibaba in China, Bezos has often expressed interest in expanding Amazon into India.[50] On July 27, 2017, Bezos momentarily became the world's wealthiest person over Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates when his estimated net worth increased to just over $90 billion. His wealth surpassed $100 billion for the first time on November 24, 2017, and he was formally designated the wealthiest person in the world by Forbes on March 6, 2018, with a net worth of $112 billion.[51]
Bezos in 2010

In March 2018, Bezos dispatched Amit Agarwal, Amazon's global senior vice president, to India with $5.5 billion to localize operations throughout the company's supply chain routes.[52] Later in the month, U.S. President Donald Trump accused Amazon–and Bezos, specifically–of sales tax avoidance, misusing postal routes, and anti-competitive business practices.[53] Amazon's share price fell by 9% in response to the President's negative comments; this reduced Bezos's personal wealth by $10.7 billion.[54] Weeks later, Bezos recouped his losses when academic reports out of Stanford University indicated that Trump could do little to regulate Amazon in any meaningful way.[55] During July 2018, a number of members of the U.S. Congress called on Bezos to detail the applications of Amazon's face recognition software, Rekognition.[56] Additionally, statements by the Trump administration, in favor of overturning the antitrust law known as the Paramount Decree, have been predicted to help Amazon acquire the Landmark Theaters chain.[57]

Criticism of Amazon's business practices continued in September 2018 when Senator Bernie Sanders introduced the Stop Bad Employers by Zeroing Out Subsidies (Stop BEZOS) Act and accused Amazon of receiving corporate welfare.[58] This followed revelations by the non-profit group New Food Economy which found that one third of Amazon workers in Arizona, and one tenth of Amazon workers in Pennsylvania and Ohio, relied on food stamps.[59] While preparing to introduce the bill, Sanders opined: "Instead of attempting to explore Mars or go to the moon, how about Jeff Bezos pays his workers a living wage?"[60] He later said: "Bezos could play a profound role. If he said today, nobody who is employed at Amazon will receive less than a living wage, it would send a message to every corporation in America."[61] Sanders's efforts elicited a response from Amazon which pointed to the 130,000 jobs it created in 2017 and called the $28,446 figure for its median salary "misleading" as it included part-time workers.[62] However, Sanders countered that the companies targeted by his proposal have placed an increased focus on part-time workers to escape benefit obligations.[63] On October 2, 2018, Bezos announced a company-wide wage increase, which Sanders applauded.[64] The American workers who were being paid the minimum wage had this increased to $15 per hour – a decision that was interpreted as support for the Fight for $15 movement.[65]
Blue Origin
Main article: Blue Origin
Bezos giving NASA Deputy Administrator Lori Garver (fourth from left) a tour of Blue Origin's crew capsule in 2011.
U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter meets with Bezos in 2016 at The Pentagon.

In September 2000, Bezos founded Blue Origin, a human spaceflight startup company.[66] Bezos has long expressed an interest in space travel and the development of human life in the solar system.[22] He was the valedictorian when he graduated from high school in 1982. His speech was followed up with a Miami Herald interview in which he expressed an interest to build and develop hotels, amusement parks, and colonies for human beings who were in orbit.[67] The 18-year-old Bezos stated that he wanted to preserve Earth from overuse through resource depletion.[68]

After its founding, Blue Origin maintained a low profile until 2006, when it purchased a large tract of land in West Texas for a launch and test facility.[69] After the company gained the public's attention during the late 2000s, Bezos additionally indicated his interest in reducing the cost of space travel for humans while also increasing the safety of extraterrestrial travel.[70] In September 2011, one of the company's unmanned prototype vehicles crashed during a short-hop test flight. Although the crash was viewed as a setback, news outlets noted how far the company went from its founding-to-date in advancing spaceflight.[71] In May 2013, Bezos met with Richard Branson, chairman of Virgin Galactic, to discuss commercial spaceflight opportunities and strategies.[72] He has been compared to Branson and Elon Musk as all three are billionaires who prioritize spaceflight among their business interests.[73]

In 2015, Bezos announced that a new orbital launch vehicle was under development and would make its first flight in the late-2010s.[74] Later in November, Blue Origin's New Shepard space vehicle successfully rocketed into space and reached its planned test altitude of 329,839 feet (100.5 kilometers) before executing a vertical landing back at the launch site in West Texas. In 2016, Bezos allowed select journalists to visit, tour, and photograph his facility.[75] He has repeatedly called for increased inter-space energy and industrial manufacturing to decrease the negative costs associated with business-related pollution.[76]

In December 2017, New Shepard successfully flew and landed dummy passengers, amending and pushing its human space travel start date into late 2018.[77] To execute this program, Blue Origin built six of the vehicles to support all phases of testing and operations: no-passenger test flights, flights with test passengers, and commercial-passenger weekly operations.[78] Since 2016, Bezos has spoken more freely about his hopes to colonize the solar system, and has been selling $1 billion in Amazon stock each year to capitalize Blue Origin in an effort to support this endeavor.[79][80] In May 2018, Bezos maintained that the primary goal of Blue Origin is to preserve the natural resources of Earth by making the human species multi-planetary.[81] He announced that New Shepard would begin transporting humans into sub-orbital space by November 2018.[81] In July 2018, it was announced that Bezos had priced commercial spaceflight tickets from $200,000 to $300,000 per person.[82]
The Washington Post

On August 5, 2013, Bezos announced his purchase of The Washington Post for $250 million in cash.[83] To execute the sale, he established Nash Holdings, a limited liability holding company that legally owns the paper.[84] The sale closed on October 1, 2013, and Nash Holdings took control.[85] In March 2014, Bezos made his first significant change at The Washington Post and lifted the online paywall for subscribers of a number of U.S. local newspapers in Texas, Hawaii, and Minnesota.[86] In January 2016, Bezos set out to reinvent the newspaper as a media and technology company by reconstructing its digital media, mobile platforms, and analytics software.[87] Throughout the early years of ownership, Bezos was accused of having a potential conflict of interest with the paper.[88] Bezos and the newspaper's editorial board have dismissed accusations that he unfairly controlled the paper's content and Bezos maintains the paper's independence.[89][90] After a surge in online readership in 2016, the paper was profitable for the first time since Bezos made the purchase in 2013.[90]
Bezos Expeditions

Bezos makes personal investments through his venture capital vehicle, Bezos Expeditions.[91] He was one of the first shareholders in Google, when he invested $250,000 in 1998. That $250,000 investment resulted in 3.3 million shares of Google stock, worth about $3.1 billion in 2017.[92][93] He also invested in Unity Biotechnology, a life-extension research firm hoping to slow or stop the process of aging.[94] Bezos is involved in the healthcare sector, which includes investments in Unity Biotechnology, Grail, Juno Therapeutics, and ZocDoc.[95] In January 2018, an announcement was made concerning Bezos's role within a new, unnamed healthcare company. This venture, later named Haven, is expected to be a partnership between Amazon, JPMorgan, and Berkshire Hathaway.[96][97]

Bezos also supports philanthropic efforts through direct donations and non-profit projects funded by Bezos Expeditions.[98] Bezos used Bezos Expeditions to fund several philanthropic projects, including an Innovation center at the Seattle Museum of History and Industry and the Bezos Center for Neural Circuit Dynamics at Princeton Neuroscience Institute.[99][100] In 2013, Bezos Expeditions funded the recovery of two Saturn V first-stage Rocketdyne F-1 engines from the floor of the Atlantic Ocean.[101] They were positively identified as belonging to the Apollo 11 mission's S-1C stage from July 1969.[102][103] The engine is currently on display at the Seattle Museum of Flight.[104][105]
Public image

Journalist Nellie Bowles of The New York Times has described the public persona and personality of Bezos as that of "a brilliant but mysterious and coldblooded corporate titan".[106] During the 1990s, Bezos earned a reputation for relentlessly pushing Amazon forward, often at the expense of public charity and social welfare.[106][107] His business practices projected a public image of prudence and parsimony with his own wealth and that of Amazon. Bezos was a multi-billionaire who hung his clothes on a rack in his Amazon headquarters office and drove a 1996 Honda Accord.[108] Throughout the early 2000s, he was perceived to be geeky or nerdy.[109][110][111]

Bezos was seen by some as needlessly quantitative and data-driven.[112][113] This perception was detailed by Alan Deutschman who described him as "talking in lists" and "[enumerating] the criteria, in order of importance, for every decision he has made."[109] Select accounts of his persona have drawn controversy and public attention. Notably, journalist Brad Stone wrote an unauthorized book that described Bezos as a demanding boss as well as hyper-competitive.[107][112] Bezos has been characterized as a notoriously opportunistic CEO who operates with little concern for obstacles and externalities.[114][115]

During the early 2010s, Bezos solidified his reputation for aggressive business practices, and his public image began to shift. Bezos started to wear tailored clothing; he weight trained, pursued a regimented diet and began to freely spend his money.[116] His physical transformation has been compared to the transformation of Amazon; he is often referred to as the metonym of the company.[117][118] His physical appearance increased the public's perception of him as a symbolically dominant figure in business and in popular culture, wherein he has been parodied as an enterprising super villain.[119][120][121] Since 2017, he has been portrayed by Kyle Mooney and Steve Carell on Saturday Night Live, usually as an undercutting, domineering figure.[122] Bezos eats exotic foods, such as octopus and roasted iguana.[123][124][125] In May 2014, the International Trade Union Confederation named Bezos the "World's Worst Boss", with its general secretary Sharan Burrow saying: "Jeff Bezos represents the inhumanity of employers who are promoting the North American corporate model."[126] During the late 2010s, Bezos reversed his reputation for being reluctant to spend money on non-business-related expenses.[13] His relative lack of philanthropy compared to other billionaires has drawn a negative response from the public since 2016.[127][13] Bezos has been known to publicly contest claims made in critical articles, as exemplified in 2015 when he sent a memo to employees denouncing a New York Times piece.[128][129]
Leadership style
"Day 1" Management Philosophy
Day 1: start up
Day 2: stasis
Day 3: irrelevance
Day 4: "excruciating, painful decline"
Day 5: death

Bezos has stated "it is always Day 1" to describe his growth mindset.[130][131]

Bezos used what he called a "regret-minimization framework" while he worked at D. E. Shaw and again during the early years of Amazon.[132] He described this life philosophy by stating: "When I'm 80, am I going to regret leaving Wall Street? No. Will I regret missing the beginning of the Internet? Yes."[132] During the 1990s and early 2000s at Amazon, he was characterized as trying to quantify all aspects of running the company, often listing employees on spreadsheets and basing executive decisions on data.[133] To push Amazon forward, Bezos developed the mantra "Get Big Fast", which spoke to the company's need to scale its operations and establish market dominance.[34] He favored diverting Amazon profits back into the company in lieu of allocating it amongst shareholders in the form of dividends.[109]

Bezos uses the term "work–life harmony" instead of the more standard work–life balance because he believes balance implies that you can have one and not the other.[134] He believes that work and home life are interconnected, informing and calibrating each other.[134] Journalist Walt Mossberg dubbed the idea that someone who cannot tolerate criticism or critique shouldn't do anything new or interesting "The Bezos Principle".[135] Bezos does not schedule early morning meetings and enforces a two-pizza rule–a preference for meetings to be small enough to where two pizzas can feed everyone in the board room.[136] When interviewing candidates for jobs at Amazon he has stated he considers three inquiries: can he admire the person, can the person raise the common standard, and under what circumstances could the person become exemplary.[137]

He meets with Amazon investors for a total of only six hours a year.[136] Instead of using PowerPoints, Bezos requires high-level employees to present information with six-page narratives.[138] Starting in 1998, Bezos publishes an annual letter for Amazon shareholders wherein he frequently refers to five principles: focus on customers not competitors, take risks for market leadership, facilitate staff morale, build a company culture, and empower people.[139][140] Bezos maintains the email address "jeff@amazon.com" as an outlet for customers to reach out to him and the company.[141] Although he does not respond to the emails, he forwards some of them with a question mark in the subject line to executives who attempt to address the issues.[141] Bezos has cited Warren Buffett (of Berkshire Hathaway), Jamie Dimon (of JPMorgan Chase), and Bob Iger (of Walt Disney) as major influences on his leadership style.[142]
Recognition

    In 1999, Bezos received his first major award when Time named him Person of the Year.[143]
    In 2008, he was selected by U.S. News & World Report as one of America's best leaders.[144]
    Bezos was awarded an honorary doctorate in science and technology from Carnegie Mellon University in 2008.[145]
    In 2011, The Economist gave Bezos and Gregg Zehr an Innovation Award for the Amazon Kindle.[146]
    In 2012, Bezos was named Businessperson of the Year by Fortune.[147]
    He is also a member of the Bilderberg Group and attended the 2011 Bilderberg conference in St. Moritz, Switzerland,[148] and the 2013 conference in Watford, Hertfordshire, England. He was a member of the Executive Committee of The Business Council for 2011 and 2012.[149]
    In 2014, he was ranked the best-performing CEO in the world by Harvard Business Review.[150]
    He has also figured in Fortune's list of 50 great leaders of the world for three straight years, topping the list in 2015.[151]
    In September 2016, Bezos received a $250,000 prize for winning the Heinlein Prize for Advances in Space Commercialization, which he donated to the Students for the Exploration and Development of Space.[152]
    In February 2018, Bezos was elected to the National Academy of Engineering for "leadership and innovation in space exploration, autonomous systems, and building a commercial pathway for human space flight".[153]
    In March 2018, at the Explorers Club annual dinner, he was awarded the Buzz Aldrin Space Exploration Award in recognition of his work with Blue Origin.[123]
    He received Germany's 2018 Axel Springer Award for Business Innovation and Social Responsibility.[154] Time magazine named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world in their 2018 listing.[155]

Wealth
Annual estimates of Jeff Bezos's net worth[b]
Year 	Billions 	Change 	Year 	Billions 	Change
1999 	10.1 	Steady 0.0% 	2009 	6.8 	Decrease 17.7%
2000 	6.1 	Decrease 40.5% 	2010 	12.6 	Increase 85.2%
2001 	2.0 	Decrease 66.6% 	2011 	18.1 	Increase 43.6%
2002 	1.5 	Decrease 25.0% 	2012 	23.2 	Increase 28.2%
2003 	2.5 	Increase 66.6% 	2013 	28.9 	Increase 24.5%
2004 	5.1 	Increase 104.0% 	2014 	30.5 	Increase 5.5%
2005 	4.1 	Decrease 5.8% 	2015 	50.3 	Increase 60.9%
2006 	4.3 	Decrease 10.4% 	2016 	45.2 	Decrease 10.1%
2007 	8.7 	Increase 102.3% 	2017 	72.8 	Increase 61.6%
2008 	8.2 	Decrease 5.7% 	2018 	112.0 	Increase 53.8%
Main data source: Forbes World's Billionaires Estimates
Additional reference(s): Bloomberg Billionaires Index

Bezos first became a millionaire in 1997 after raising $54 million through Amazon's initial public offering (IPO).[156] He was first included on the Forbes World's Billionaires list in 1999 with a registered net worth of $10.1 billion.[157] His net worth decreased to $6.1 billion a year later, a 40.5% drop.[158] His wealth plummeted even more the following year, dropping 66.6% to $2.0 billion.[159] He lost $500 million the following year, which brought his net worth down to $1.5 billion.[160] The following year, his net worth increased by 104% to $2.5 billion.[161] From 2005 to 2007, he quadrupled his net worth to $8.7 billion.[162] After the financial crisis and succeeding economic recession, his net worth would decrease to $6.8 billion—a 17.7% drop.[163][164] His wealth rose by 85.2% in 2010, leaving him with $12.6 billion. This percentage increase ascended him to the 43rd spot on the ranking from 68th.[163][165]

After a rumor broke out that Amazon was developing a smartphone, Bezos's net worth rose to $30.5 billion in 2014.[166][167] A year later, Bezos entered the top ten when he increased his net worth to a total of $50.3 billion.[168] Bezos rose to be the 5th richest person in the world hours before market close; he gained $7 billion in one hour.[168] By the time the Forbes list was calculated in March 2016, his net worth was registered at $45.2 billion.[169] However, just months later in October 2016, his wealth increased by $16.2 billion to $66.5 billion unofficially ranking him the third richest person in the world behind Warren Buffett.[170] After sporadic jumps in Amazon's share price, in July 2017 he briefly unseated Microsoft cofounder Bill Gates as the wealthiest person in the world.[171]
The net worth of Jeff Bezos from 1999 to 2018 as estimated by Forbes magazine, in the nominal U.S. dollar. His net worth is calculated in the billions by March of each year.

Bezos would continue to sporadically surpass Gates throughout the month of October 2017 after Amazon's share price fluctuated.[172] His net worth surpassed $100 billion for the first time on November 24, 2017, after Amazon's share price increased by more than 2.5%.[173] When the 2017 list was issued, Bezos's net worth was registered at $72.8 billion, adding $27.6 billion from the previous year.[174] Bezos was officially ranked as the third wealthiest person in the world up from the 5th spot in 2016.[174] His wealth's rapid growth from 2016 to 2017 sparked a variety of assessments about how much money Bezos earned on a controlled, reduced time scale. On October 10, 2017, he made an estimated $6.24 billion in 5 minutes, slightly less than the annual Gross Domestic Product of Kyrgyzstan.[175]

On March 6, 2018, Bezos was officially designated the wealthiest person in the world with a registered net worth of $112 billion.[176] He unseated Bill Gates ($90 billion) who was $6 billion ahead of Warren Buffett ($84 billion), ranked third.[177] He is considered the first registered centi-billionaire (not adjusted for inflation).[c]

His wealth, in 2017–18 terms, equaled that of 2.7 million Americans.[183] Bezos's net worth increased by $33.6 billion from January 2017 to January 2018. This increase outstripped the economic development (in GDP terms) of more than 96 countries around the world.[184] During March 9, Bezos earned $230,000 every 60 seconds.[185] The Motley Fool estimated that if Bezos had not sold any of his shares from its original public offering in 1997, his net worth would sit at $181 billion in 2018.[186] According to Quartz, his net worth of $150 billion in July 2018 was enough to purchase the entire stock markets of Nigeria, Hungary, Egypt, Luxembourg, and Iran.[187] Following the report by Quartz, Amazon workers in Poland, (Germany), and Spain participated in demonstrations and labor strikes to draw attention to his growing wealth and the lack of compensation, labor rights, and satisfactory working conditions of select Amazon workers.[188] On July 17, 2018 he was designated the "wealthiest person in modern history"[d] by the Bloomberg Billionaires Index,[191] Fortune,[192] MarketWatch,[193] The Wall Street Journal,[194] and Forbes.[190]

In 2019, Bezos's wealth was reduced by his divorce from his wife MacKenzie Bezos.[195][196] According to Forbes, had the Washington state common law applied to their divorce without a prenuptial agreement, Bezos's wealth could have been equitably divided with his ex-wife,[197][198] however she eventually received 25% of Bezos's Amazon shares, valued at approximately $36 billion, making her the third richest woman in the world. Bezos retained his interest in The Washington Post and Blue Origin, as well as voting control of the shares received by his ex-wife.[199]

In June 2019, Bezos purchased three adjoining apartments overlooking Madison Square Park in Manhattan, including a penthouse, for a combined total of US$80 million, making this one of the most expensive real estate purchases within New York City in 2019.[200]

In February 2020, Bezos purchased the Warner Estate from David Geffen for $165 million,[201][202] a record price paid for a residence in the Los Angeles area. The previous record high price of $150 million was paid by Lachlan Murdoch.[201] During the COVID-19 pandemic, it was reported that Bezos' fortune had grown by $24bn, citing a surge in demand from households on lockdown shopping on Amazon.[203]
Personal life

In 1992, Bezos was working for D. E. Shaw in Manhattan when he met novelist MacKenzie Tuttle, who was a research associate at the firm; the couple married a year later.[30][204] In 1994, they moved across the country to Seattle, Washington, where Bezos founded Amazon.[205] Bezos and his now ex-wife MacKenzie are the parents of four children: three sons, and one daughter adopted from China.[68][206]

In March 2003, Bezos was one of three passengers in a helicopter that crashed in West Texas after the craft's tail boom hit a tree.[207] Bezos sustained minor injuries and was discharged from a local hospital the same day.[25]

In 2016, Bezos played a Starfleet official in the movie Star Trek Beyond, and joined the cast and crew at a San Diego Comic-Con screening.[208] He had lobbied Paramount for the role and apropos of Alexa and his personal/professional interest in speech recognition. His one line consisted of a response to an alien in distress: "Speak Normally." In his initial discussion of the project which became Alexa with his technical advisor Greg Hart in 2011, Bezos told him that the goal was to create "the Star Trek computer." [209]

On January 9, 2019, Bezos and his wife of 25 years, MacKenzie, announced on Twitter their intent to divorce after a "long period" of separation.[210][211][212] On April 4, 2019, the divorce was finalized, with Bezos keeping 75% of the couple's Amazon stock and MacKenzie getting the remaining 25% ($35.6 billion) in Amazon stock. However, Bezos would keep all of the couple's voting rights.[213]

On February 7, 2019, Bezos published an online essay in which he accused American Media, Inc. owner David Pecker of "extortion and blackmail" for threatening to publish intimate photos of Bezos and Lauren Sánchez, if he did not stop his investigation into how his text messages and other photos had been leaked to the National Enquirer.[214][215]
Politics
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi presenting the USIBC Global Leadership Award to Bezos, in Washington, D.C. on June 7, 2016

According to public campaign finance records, Bezos supported the electoral campaigns of Patty Murray and Maria Cantwell, two Democratic U.S. senators from Washington. He has also supported U.S. representative John Conyers, as well as Patrick Leahy and Spencer Abraham, U.S. senators serving on committees dealing with Internet-related issues.[216] Jeff Bezos and MacKenzie Bezos have supported the legalization of same-sex marriage, and in 2012 contributed $2.5 million to Washington United for Marriage, a group supporting a yes vote on Washington Referendum 74, which affirmed a same-sex marriage law enacted in the state.[217] Bezos donated $100,000 towards a movement against a Washington state income tax in 2010 for "top earners." [216] In 2012, he donated to Amazon's political action committee (PAC),[216] which has given $56,000 and $74,500 to Democrats and Republicans, respectively.[218]

After the 2016 presidential election, Bezos was invited to join Donald Trump's Defense Innovation Advisory Board, an advisory council to improve the technology used by the Defense Department. Bezos declined the offer without further comment.[42][219] Trump has repeatedly attacked Bezos via Twitter, accused Bezos of avoiding corporate taxes, gaining undue political influence, and undermining his presidency by spreading "fake news."[220][221] Bezos has repeatedly joked about using his rocket company to send Donald Trump into outer space.[222][223]

In 2014, Amazon won a bid for a cloud computing contract with the CIA valued at $600 million.[224] A 2018, $10 billion contract known as the Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure (JEDI) project, this time with the Pentagon, was allegedly written up in a way that favors Amazon.[225] Controversy over this was raised when General James Mattis accepted a headquarters tour invitation from Bezos and co-ordinated the deal through Sally Donnelly, a lobbyist who previously worked for Amazon.[226] In November 2019, when the contract was awarded to Microsoft instead, Amazon filed a lawsuit with allegations that the bidding process was biased.[227][228] Despite Bezos's support for an open borders policy towards immigrants, Amazon has actively marketed facial recognition software to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).[229]

In 2019, a political action committee linked to Bezos spent over $1 million in an unsuccessful attempt to defeat activist Kshama Sawant in Seattle's city council election.[230]
Saudi hacking claim
See also: Jamal Khashoggi and Assassination of Jamal Khashoggi

In March 2018, Bezos met in Seattle with Mohammad bin Salman, the crown prince and de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia, to discuss investment opportunities for Saudi Vision 2030.[231] In March 2019, Bezos's security consultant accused the Saudi government of hacking Bezos's phone. According to BBC, Bezos's top security staffer, Gavin de Becker, "linked the hack to the Washington Post's coverage of the murder of Saudi writer Jamal Khashoggi at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul." Khashoggi, a Saudi journalist and dissident was employed as a writer at the Washington Post, owned by Bezos. Khashoggi was killed in late 2018, in Turkey's Saudi consulate for his critical stance and journalism against the Saudi government and its leader.[232]

On January 2020, The Guardian reported that hack was initiated before the murder but after Khashoggi wrote critically about the crown prince in the Washington Post. Forensic analysis of Bezos's mobile phone conducted by advisory firm FTI Consulting, concluded it "highly probable" that the hack was achieved using a malicious file hidden in a video sent in a WhatsApp message to Bezos from the personal account of the crown prince on May 1, 2018.[233][234] Saudi Arabia has denied the claim.[235]
Philanthropy
Bezos funded the retrieval of these F-1 engine parts from the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean in 2015, eventually donating them to the Seattle Museum of Flight. They are from Apollo 16 (above) and Apollo 12 (below).

Bezos donated to the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center several times between 2009 and 2017.[236] In 2013, he pledged $500,000 to Worldreader, a non-profit founded by a former Amazon employee.[237]

In September 2018, Business Insider reported that Bezos was the only one of the top five billionaires in the world who had not signed the Giving Pledge, an initiative created by Bill Gates and Warren Buffett that encourages wealthy people to give away a majority of their wealth.[238] That same month, Janet Camarena, director of transparency initiatives at Foundation Center, was quoted by CNBC as having questions about Bezos’ new fund, including the fund's structure and how exactly it will be funded.[239]

On May 23, 2017, Bezos gave $1 million to the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, which provides pro bono legal services for American journalists.[240] On June 15, 2017, he posted a message on Twitter asking for ideas for philanthropy: "I'm thinking about a philanthropy strategy that is the opposite of how I mostly spend my time—working on the long term".[13] At the time of the post, Bezos's lifetime spending on charitable causes was estimated to be $100 million.[13] Multiple journalists responded by asking Bezos to pay higher wages to Amazon warehouse workers.[241][242] A year later in June, he tweeted that he would announce two philanthropic foci by the end of summer 2018.[243] Bezos announced in September 2018 that he would commit approximately $2 billion to a fund to deal with American homelessness and establish a network of non-profit preschools for low income communities.[244] As part of this announcement, he committed to establishing the "Day 1 Families Fund" to finance "night shelters and day care centers for homeless families" and the "Day 1 Academies Fund" for early childhood education.[245][246]

In January 2018, Bezos made a $33 million donation to TheDream.US, a college scholarship fund for undocumented immigrants brought to the United States as minors.[247] In June 2018, Bezos donated to Breakthrough Energy Ventures, a private philanthropic fund founded by Bill Gates aimed at promoting emissions-free energy.[248] In September 2018, Bezos donated $10 million to With Honor, a nonpartisan organization that works to increase the number of veterans in political office.[249]

On February 17, 2020, Jeff Bezos pledged $10 billion to combat climate change through the Bezos Earth Fund.[250] Bezos also donated $100 million to food banks through Feeding America during the COVID-19 pandemic; critics pointed out that this represented less than 0.1% of his fortune during a time Amazon was seeing growth in sales.[251][252][253]
See also

    List of Princeton University alumni
    List of richest Americans in history
    List of Time Person of the Year recipients

    P vip.svgBiography portalRocketSunIcon.svgSpaceflight portalCrystal Clear app linneighborhood.svgInternet portalTelecom-icon.svgTechnology portalEmblem-money.svgBusiness portalFlag of the United States.svgUnited States portal

Notes

BAY-zohss
All currency figures expressed in the United States dollar (US$) in nominal terms.
Although Bill Gates momentarily surpassed the $100 billion net worth mark in April 1999 before the Dot-com bubble,[178] Bezos was the first to register $100 billion with major wealth indexes and has retained the wealth for longer than Gates's three weeks.[179][180][181][182]

    Many calculations of Bezos's wealth during the late 2010s were not adjusted for inflation. When he was designated the "world wealthiest person" on March 6, 2018, the Forbes The World's Billionaires list stipulated that although Bezos was the first centi-billionaire (i.e. +US$100 billion in net worth), it was Bill Gates who had the most money when taken in real terms.[189] In such terms, Gates had $150 billion while Bezos had $100 billion. However, in July 2018, the net worth of Bezos officially surpassed the $150 billion mark, which led most major wealth indexes to label him the wealthiest person in modern history (post-1982).[190]

References

"Forbes Profile: Jeff Bezos". Forbes. Real Time Net Worth. Online: updated every 24-hour market cycle. "[Forbes real time net worths] are calculated from locked in stock prices and exchange rates from around the globe.... as well as the vetting of personal balance sheets..."
"Jeff Bezos pronounces his name". The Washington Post. 2009. Retrieved August 17, 2013.; and Robinson (2010), p. 7.
"This Is The Richest Person in the World". Forbes. 2019. Retrieved March 19, 2019.
"Unveiling Business Strategy: Amazon". Analytics Insight. November 10, 2019. Retrieved December 12, 2019.
Sheetz, Michael (January 23, 2019). "Blue Origin successfully launches experiments for NASA as Bezos' space company nears first human flights". CNBC. Retrieved December 12, 2019.
Robinson (2010), pp. 14, 100
Robinson (2010), pp. 14–15
Robinson (2010), p. 14, 18
Robinson (2010), p. 15
Robinson (2010), p. 17
Robinson (2010), p. 18
Robinson (2010), p. 16
Frank, Robert (June 15, 2017). "At Last, Jeff Bezos Offers a Hint of His Philanthropic Plans". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Parkhurst, Emily (August 5, 2015). "Jeff Bezos just sold $534 million worth of Amazon stock". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved August 5, 2015.
"Jeff Bezos' roots could give Texas an edge as Amazon.com looks for new HQ site". The Dallas Morning News. September 7, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2018.
Robinson (2010), p. 19
"Biography and Video Interview of Jeff Bezos at Academy of Achievement". Achievement.org. Retrieved April 1, 2019.
Yanez, Luisa (August 5, 2013). "Jeff Bezos: A rocket launched from Miami's Palmetto High". The Miami Herald. Retrieved February 11, 2018.
Bayers, Chip. "The Inner Bezos". WIRED. Retrieved February 11, 2018.
Fishman, Charles (January 31, 2001). "Face Time With Jeff Bezos". Fast Company. Retrieved April 16, 2018.
Robinson (2010), p. 24
Martinez, Amy (March 31, 2012). "Amazon.com's Bezos invests in space travel, time". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
Foer, Franklin (November 1, 2019). "Jeff Bezos's Master Plan". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 10, 2019.
Robinson (2010), p. 26
Deutschman, Alan (August 1, 2004). "Inside the Mind of Jeff Bezos". Fast Company. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Robinson (2010), pp. 25–27
"Biography and Video Interview of Jeff Bezos at Academy of Achievement". Achievement.
Robinson (2010), p. 7
Bayers, Chip (July 2003). "The Inner Bezos". Wired. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
Bayers, Chip. "The Inner Bezos". WIRED. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Robinson (2010), p. 39
Clifford, Catherine (October 27, 2017). "How Amazon's Jeff Bezos went from the son of a teen mom to the richest person in the world". CNBC. Retrieved March 6, 2018.
"Top Executive Profiles – Jeffrey P. Bezos". Portfolio.com. Archived from the original on February 4, 2009.
"Amazon.com | History & Facts". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Robinson (2010), p. 56
Shen, Lucinda (May 15, 2017). "If You Invested in Amazon at Its IPO, You Could Have Been a Millionaire". Fortune. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Rivlin, Gary (July 10, 2005). "A Retail Revolution Turns 10". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Rivlin, Gary (October 7, 2005). "A Retail Revolution Turns 10". The New York Times. Retrieved April 3, 2018.
Bezos, Jeff. "The electricity metaphor for the web's future". Retrieved March 7, 2018.
"Amazon: Reinventing the Book". Newsweek. November 17, 2007. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Quittner, Josh (May 12, 2008). "The 2008 Time 100 – Time". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Davenport, Christian; Lamothe, Dan (February 23, 2018). "How Jeff Bezos was selected for, but never joined, the Defense Innovation Board". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
"Bezos: I never expected this'". Digital Commerce 360. January 4, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2018.
"Bezos Jeffrey P.: Insider Trading Transactions". InsiderMole.com. Retrieved July 14, 2016.
"Jeff Bezos Net Worth". Davemanuel.com. Archived from the original on December 30, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
Bhattarai, Abha (February 1, 2018). "Amazon posts quarterly profit of $1.9 billion, its highest ever". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Bloomberg (March 12, 2018). "Bezos is putting $1 billion a year into rocket-maker Blue Origin by selling Amazon stock". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
Belanger, Lydia (January 29, 2018). "Billionaire Jeff Bezos Will Star in Amazon's Super Bowl Ad". Entrepreneur. Retrieved April 7, 2018.
Dastin, Jeffrey (February 1, 2018). "Amazon posts largest profit in its history on sales, tax boost". Reuters. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
Bloomberg (March 9, 2018). "After losing China, Jeff Bezos really wants to win in India". The Times of India. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
Debter, Lauren (September 4, 2018). "Jeff Bezos Is $1.8 Billion Richer As Amazon's Market Cap Briefly Hits $1 Trillion". Forbes. Retrieved June 19, 2019.
"Five Things You Need to Know to Start Your Day". Bloomberg L.P. March 5, 2018. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Kosoff, Maya. "Forget Zuckerberg: Why Trump Is "Obsessed" with Breaking Bezos". The Hive. Retrieved January 2, 2018.
Shen, Lucinda (January 2, 2018). "The World's Richest Man Just Lost $10.7 Billion as Trump Tweets About Amazon". Fortune. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
Stevens, Laura (April 9, 2018). "Why a Trump-Led Antitrust Case Against Amazon Is a Long Shot". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 9, 2018.
Captain, Sean (July 26, 2018). "Congress demands Jeff Bezos explain Amazon's face recognition software". Fast Company. Retrieved July 26, 2018.
Sakoui, Anousha; Ahmed, Nabila; Soper, Spencer (August 16, 2018). "Amazon is trying to buy movie chain Landmark Theaters". Time. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Bhattarai, Abha (September 5, 2018). "Bernie Sanders introduces 'Stop BEZOS Act'". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Robertson, Adi (September 5, 2018). "Bernie Sanders introduces 'Stop BEZOS' bill to tax Amazon for underpaying workers". The Verge. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Stewart, Emily (September 5, 2018). "Bernie Sanders's BEZOS bill takes aim at how Amazon pays workers". Vox. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Gibson, Kate (September 5, 2018). "Bernie Sanders targets Amazon, Walmart with 100% tax". CBS. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
"Response to Senator Sanders". August 29, 2018. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Delaney, Arthur; Jamieson, Dave (September 5, 2018). "What the Bernie Sanders Amazon welfare fight is really about". HuffPost. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Weise, Karen (October 2, 2018). "Amazon to raise minimum wage to $15 for all U.S. workers". The New York Times. Retrieved October 22, 2018.
Matsakis, Louise (October 2, 2018). "Why Amazon really raised its minimum wage to $15". Wired. Retrieved October 22, 2018.
Boyle, Alan (December 9, 2011). "Blue Origin Revealed". MSNBC. Archived from the original on December 23, 2009.
"Taking the long view". The Economist. March 3, 2012. Retrieved April 29, 2018.
Whoriskey, Peter (August 12, 2013). "For Jeff Bezos, a new frontier". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 20, 2014.
Mangalindan, Mylene (November 10, 2006). "Buzz in West Texas is about Jeff Bezos space craft launch site". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 28, 2008.
Levy, Steven (November 13, 2011). "Jeff Bezos Owns the Web in More Ways Than You Think". Wired. Retrieved December 9, 2011.
"Taking the long view: Jeff Bezos, the founder and chief executive of Amazon, owes much of his success to his ability to look beyond the short-term view of things". The Economist. March 3, 2012. Retrieved August 10, 2013. "Mr Bezos's willingness to take a long-term view also explains his fascination with space travel, and his decision to found a secretive company called Blue Origin, one of several start-ups now building spacecraft with private funding."
Veverka, Mark (May 27, 2013). "Unplugged: Richard Branson's otherworldly space quest". USA Today. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
Worrall, Simon (April 7, 2018). "Three Billionaires Are Racing to Space. Who Will Win?". National Geographic. Retrieved April 7, 2018.
Foust, Jeff (September 15, 2015). "Bezos Not Concerned About Competition, Possible ULA Sale". Space News. Retrieved September 16, 2015.
Boyle, Alan (March 8, 2016). "Jeff Bezos lifts curtain on Blue Origin rocket factory, lays out grand plan for space travel that spans hundreds of years". GeekWire. Retrieved March 11, 2016.
Berger, Eric (March 10, 2016). "Jeff Bezos says he wants to fly into space 'as soon as possible'". Ars Technica. Retrieved March 11, 2016. "Bezos: I want to change the whole cost structure of accessing space."
Malik, Tariq. "Later, Vader! Watch Blue Origin Fly 'Mannequin Skywalker' to Space and Back". Space.com. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
Foust, Jeff (March 8, 2016). "Blue Origin plans growth spurt this year". SpaceNews. Retrieved March 11, 2016.
St. Fluer, Nicholas (April 5, 2017). "Jeff Bezos Says He Is Selling $1 Billion a Year in Amazon Stock to Finance Race to Space". The New York Times. Retrieved April 8, 2017.
Ayque, Jamie (September 27, 2016). "Jeff Bezos: Blue Origin Wants to Colonize the Solar System". Retrieved September 27, 2016.
Boyle, Alan (May 29, 2018). "Jeff Bezos: 'We will have to leave this planet ... and it's going to make this planet better'". GeekWire. Retrieved May 31, 2018.
Johnson, Eric M. (July 16, 2018). "Exclusive: Jeff Bezos plans to charge at least $200,000 for space..." Reuters. Retrieved July 18, 2018.
Farhi, Paul (August 6, 2013). "Washington Post to be sold to Jeff Bezos". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 5, 2013.
Matthews, Dylan (August 8, 2013). "Jeff Bezos is buying The Washington Post. Here's what you need to know about the sale". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 11, 2018.
Farhi, Paul (October 1, 2013). "The Washington Post closes sale to Amazon founder Jeff Bezos". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 31, 2014.
Luckerson, Victor (March 19, 2014). "Jeff Bezos Makes His First Major Move at the Washington Post". Time. Retrieved February 20, 2016.
McCrakken, Harry (November 17, 2017). "The Washington Post Is a Software Company Now". Fast Company. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Streitfeld, David; Haughney, Christine (August 17, 2013). "Expecting the Unexpected From Jeff Bezos". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Block, Melissa. "Washington Post' May Find Conflicts in Amazon Coverage". NPR. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Wieczner, Jen. "How Jeff Bezos Reacts to 'Negative' Amazon Articles in the Washington Post". Fortune. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Hess, Abigail (August 29, 2017). "Inside Jeff Bezos' $80 billion empire". CNBC. Retrieved September 13, 2017.
Turo, Jay. "The Story of Jeff Bezos' $250,000 Investment into Google in 1998". Growthink. Retrieved February 28, 2017.
Swisher, Kara (2009). "New Yorker: Bezos' Initial Google Investment Was $250K in 1998 Because 'I Just Fell in Love with Larry and Sergey'". All Things D. Retrieved February 28, 2017.
Bloom, Ester (March 31, 2017). "Google's co-founders and other Silicon Valley billionaires are trying to live forever". CNBC. Retrieved June 29, 2017.
Farr, Christina (February 3, 2018). "We can learn a lot about Jeff Bezos' health strategy by looking at his investments". CNBC. Retrieved February 4, 2018.
Lashinsky, Adam (January 31, 2018). "Why Jeff Bezos Might Be the One to Crack the Health Care Challenge". Fortune. Retrieved February 4, 2018.
Wingfield, Nick; Thomas, Katie; Abelson, Reed (January 30, 2018). "Amazon, Berkshire Hathaway and JPMorgan Team Up to Try to Disrupt Health Care". The New York Times. Retrieved February 4, 2018.
Wingfield, Nick (June 15, 2017). "Jeff Bezos Wants Ideas for Philanthropy, So He Asked Twitter". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Martinez, Amy (August 5, 2013). "Billionaire Bezos adds to eclectic interests". The Seattle Times. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
"Jeff and MacKenzie Bezos Flip the Switch on New Bezos Center for Innovation at MOHAI, Kicking Off Saturday Launch Celebration". mohai.org. Retrieved December 31, 2017.
Garber, Megan (March 20, 2013). "The Engines That Propelled Us into Space, Recovered From the Ocean Floor". The Atlantic. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
Pearlman, Robert Z. (July 19, 2013). "Rocket Engine Part Recovered by Amazon CEO Has Apollo 11 History". Space.com. New York. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
Poeter, By Damon; March 20, 2013 10:41 pm EST; March 20, 2013. "Bezos Salvage Team Plucks Apollo Rocket Engines from Atlantic". PC Magazine. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
"Apollo F-1 Engine Preview | The Museum of Flight". museumofflight.org. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
"As Apollo 11 moon landing anniversary nears, space fans get ready to celebrate". GeekWire. March 16, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
Wingfield, Nick; Bowles, Nellie (2018). "Jeff Bezos, Mr. Amazon.com, Steps Out". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Kakutani, Michiko (October 28, 2013). "The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Steinberg, Brian (February 12, 2012). "Amazon Uses '60 Minutes' To Unveil Automated Delivery Drones". Variety. Retrieved March 10, 2018.
Deutschman, Alan (August 1, 2004). "Inside the Mind of Jeff Bezos". Fast Company. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Bergman, Gregory; Lambert, Josh (December 18, 2010). Geektionary: From Anime to Zettabyte, An A to Z Guide to All Things Geek. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781440511882.
Bryan, Chloe. "If Jeff Bezos really wanted to rule the world, he'd pose for corny photos like he used to". Mashable. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Anderson, George. "Is Jeff Bezos a Horrible Boss and Is That Good?". Forbes. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Fisher, Marc (April 4, 2018). "Why Trump went after Bezos: Two billionaires across a cultural divide". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 6, 2018.
Caine, Aine (November 14, 2017). "9 Shocking Anecdotes That Reveal Jeff Bezos's Cutthroat Management Style". Inc.com. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Lashinsky, Adam. "How Jeff Bezos Became a Power Beyond Amazon". Fortune. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Kircher, Madison Malone. "Guess How Many Pillsbury Biscuits Jeff Bezos Used to Eat Daily". Select All. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Lidsky, David (February 27, 2018). "How Amazon Got Swole Just Like CEO Jeff Bezos". Fast Company. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
"Jeff Bezos: The man who turned Amazon into an empire". Men's Fitness. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
"Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos stuns everyone with his macho look, Twitter users compare him with The Rock, Vin Diesel". The Financial Express. July 15, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
MarketWatch. "Jeff Bezos's latest sideline has lots of people comparing him to a comic-book supervillain". MarketWatch. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
McEnery, Thornton. "Jeff Bezos, Who Is Not A Super-Villain, Is Building A Giant Clock Inside A Mountain, Because He's NOT A Super-Villain". Dealbreaker. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Wang, Amy (November 18, 2018). "On SNL, a bald Steve Carell plays Jeff Bezos – and won't stop trolling Trump". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 19, 2018.
Jones, Rhett. "Jeff Bezos Eats Iguana, Vows to Make Space Travel Cheaper With 'Amazon Lottery Winnings'". Gizmodo. Retrieved March 3, 2018.
"What You Can Learn from Jeff Bezos's Sleep Habits". Inc.com. March 9, 2015. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Mimaroglu, Alp (May 24, 2016). "5 Things Jeff Bezos Does Other Than Work". Entrepreneur. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
"Amazon's Jeff Bezos Wins ITUC's World's Worst Boss Poll". Ituc-csi.org. May 22, 2014. Retrieved October 27, 2015.
Bass, Diane (October 31, 2017). "For Bezos, Now World's Richest, Philanthropy Is 'Saved for Later'". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Calamur, Krishnadev (October 19, 2015). "Amazon launches a scathing response to Times story". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
"Jeff Bezos responds to 'New York Times' report on Amazon's workplace". NPR. August 17, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Del Ray, Jason (April 12, 2017). "This is the Jeff Bezos playbook for preventing Amazon's demise". Recode. Retrieved April 22, 2018.
Atsmon, Yuval (April 22, 2017). "Amazon's Bezos could teach large companies a thing or two about strategy". MarketWatch. Retrieved April 22, 2018.
Bayers, Chip. "The Inner Bezos". WIRED. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Deutschman, Alan (August 1, 2004). "Inside the Mind of Jeff Bezos". Fast Company. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Constine, Josh. "Jeff Bezos' guide to life". TechCrunch. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Mossberg, Walt (June 2, 2016). "What Amazon's Jeff Bezos thinks about Peter Thiel and Hulk Hogan vs. Gawker / Boing Boing". boingboing.net. Retrieved April 22, 2018.
Caine, Aline. "A day in the life of the richest person in history, Jeff Bezos – who made $6.44 billion in one day and still washes the dishes after dinner". Business Insider. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Montag, Ali (August 1, 2018). "This is Jeff Bezos' 3-question test for new Amazon employees". CNBC. Retrieved August 7, 2018.
Roose, Kevin (April 20, 2018). "Kevin's Week in Tech: Jeff Bezos Reminds Tech Who's Boss". The New York Times. Retrieved April 21, 2018.
Mullaney, Tim (January 12, 2017). "5 key business lessons from Amazon's Jeff Bezos". CNBC. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Lashinsky, Adam. "What Makes Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos Such a Visionary Leader". Fortune. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Bort, Julie (April 21, 2018). "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos explains his famous one-character emails, known to strike fear in manager's hearts". Business Insider. Retrieved April 21, 2018.
Hersh, Kenneth (April 20, 2018). "Forum on Leadership: Conversation with Jeff Bezos". bushcenter.org. Archived from the original on January 22, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2018.
Cooper Ramo, Joshua (December 27, 1999). "Jeffrey Preston Bezos: 1999 Person of the year". Time.
LaGesse, David (November 19, 2008). "America's Best Leaders: Jeff Bezos, Amazon.com.com CEO". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved November 25, 2008.
(CMU), Carnegie Mellon University. "April 22: Amazon.com Founder Jeff Bezos to Speak at Carnegie Mellon Business School and Computer Science Diploma Ceremonies – Carnegie Mellon University | CMU". cmu.edu. Retrieved March 6, 2018.
"Charging ahead: e-book design and popularity win Kindle creators Innovation Award". The Economist. September 19, 2011. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012.
Lashinsky, Adam. "Amazon's Jeff Bezos: The ultimate disrupter". Fortune. Archived from the original on August 9, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
"Bilderberg 2011 list of participants". BilderbergMeetings.org. Archived from the original on August 28, 2011. Retrieved August 24, 2011.
"Executive Committee". The Business Council. Archived from the original on July 21, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2013.
"The Best-Performing CEOs in the World". Harvard Business Review. Retrieved January 24, 2017.
"The World's 50 Greatest Leaders (2014)". Fortune. Retrieved March 20, 2014.
Davenport, Christian (September 15, 2016). "Jeff Bezos on nuclear reactors in space, the lack of bacon on Mars and humanity's destiny in the solar system". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 16, 2016.
"National Academy of Engineering Elects 83 Members and 16 Foreign Members". NAE Website. Retrieved February 9, 2018.
Schwär, Hannah (April 26, 2018). "Jeff Bezos responded to reports of poor working conditions at Amazon – here's what he said". Business Insider. Retrieved April 26, 2018.
Dimon, Jamie (April 26, 2018). "Jeff Bezos: The World's 100 Most Influential People". Time. Retrieved April 26, 2018.
Elkins, Kathleen (February 11, 2016). "The Age When 17 Self-Made Billionaires Earned Their First Million". Inc.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 1999". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 2000". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 2001". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 2002". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 2003". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
"The World's Richest People". Forbes. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 2009". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 2008". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Casais, Eduardo. "World's Billionaire List 2010". stats.areppim.com. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Mac, Ryan. "Jeff Bezos' Net Worth Rises $1.4 Billion on Rumors of 3-D Amazon Smartphone". Forbes. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Summers, Nick (April 21, 2014). "Jeff Bezos's Net Worth Dives in 2014". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Vinton, Kate. "Jeff Bezos Just Gained $7 Billion in an Hour to Become World's Fifth Richest". Forbes. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Peterson-Withorn, Chase. "The Full List of Every American Billionaire 2016". Forbes. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Vinton, Kate. "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos' Net Worth Hits Record High As Fortune Jumps $2.6 Billion". Forbes. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Calfas, Jennifer. "The Richest People in the World". Money. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Vinton, Kate. "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos Is the Richest Person in the World – Again". Forbes. Retrieved October 3, 2017.
Isidore, Chris. "Jeff Bezos is now worth $100 billion". CNN. Retrieved December 29, 2017.
Dolan, Kerry A. "Forbes 2017 Billionaires List: Meet The Richest People on the Planet". Forbes. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Murphy, Bill (October 27, 2017). "Jeff Bezos Made $6.2 Billion in 5 Minutes and Became the World's Richest Person (How Was Your Thursday?)". Inc.com. Retrieved April 29, 2018.
Bayly, Lucy (March 6, 2018). "America produced the largest number of billionaires in the world". NBC News. Retrieved April 30, 2018.
"Jeff Bezos moves to top spot on Forbes' annual billionaires list". Retrieved March 6, 2018.
Kirsch, Noah. "Here's Why Jeff Bezos Is Not Truly The Richest Person in History". Forbes. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
"Jeff Bezos Had a Record-Breaking One-Year Net Worth Jump". Fortune. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
Kroll, Luisa. "Forbes Billionaires 2018: Meet The Richest People on the Planet". Forbes. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
Kroll, Luisa. "Forbes Billionaires 2018: Meet The Richest People on the Planet". Forbes. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
"Jeff Bezos world's first centibillionaire: Amazon boss' journey to beat Bill Gates to the top of Forbes list". The Financial Express. April 4, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018.
Freeman, Thomas. "Jeff Bezos Is Worth $112 Billion, Overtaking Bill Gates as the Richest Man in the World". Maxim. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
"Bezos' Billions: The Wealth of a 'Centi-Billionaire'". ValueWalk. March 7, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Tuttle, Brad. "Jeff Bezos Is Making an Insane $230,000 a Minute Right Now". Money. Retrieved March 28, 2018.
Williams, Sean. "Here's How Much Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos Would Be Worth if He Never Sold a Single Share". The Motley Fool. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Karaian, Jason (July 15, 2018). "Jeff Bezos is rich enough to buy many of the world's stock markets outright". Quartz. Retrieved July 15, 2018.
Kosoff, Maya (July 17, 2018). "Is Jeff Bezos's Massive Wealth Becoming a Problem?". The Hive. Retrieved July 17, 2018.
Kirsch, Noah (March 6, 2018). "Here's Why Jeff Bezos Is Not Truly The Richest Person in History". Forbes. Retrieved July 17, 2018.
Chaykowski, Kathleen (July 17, 2018). "Jeff Bezos's Net Worth Hits Record $151 Billion After Strong Amazon 'Prime Day'". Forbes. Retrieved July 17, 2018.
"Jeff Bezos Becomes the Richest Man in Modern History, Topping $150 Billion". Bloomberg L.P. July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 17, 2018.
"Jeff Bezos Is Now the Richest Man in Modern History, Topping $150 Billion". Fortune. July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 17, 2018.
French, Sally (July 17, 2018). "Jeff Bezos becomes the richest person in modern history amid Amazon Prime Day kickoff". MarketWatch. Retrieved July 17, 2018.
McGinty, Jo Craven (August 10, 2018). "Is Jeff Bezos Really the Richest of Them All?". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 11, 2018.
Hartmans, Avery (April 4, 2019). "Jeff Bezos and MacKenzie Bezos have finalized their divorce agreement". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020. Retrieved April 4, 2019.
"World's richest man Jeff Bezos divorces". BBC. January 10, 2019.
Kirsch, Noah (January 9, 2019). "Jeff Bezos, World's Richest Person, Announces Divorce After 25 Years Of Marriage". Forbes.
Snider, Mike (January 10, 2019). "MacKenzie Bezos, author, philanthropist, and soon to be world's richest woman?". USA Today.
Hartmans, Avery. "Jeff Bezos and MacKenzie Bezos have finalized their divorce agreement, and he's getting 75% of the Amazon shares and voting control of the rest". Business Insider. Retrieved August 13, 2019.
Jordi Lippe-Mcgraw (June 5, 2019). "Jeff Bezos Buys Three Manhattan Apartments for $80 Million – The combined space totals 17,000 square feet". Architectural Digest. Retrieved June 6, 2019. "Jeff Bezos is not only taking over the internet but is also ruling the real-estate world too. It was just revealed that he purchased not one but three Manhattan apartments overlooking Madison Square Park for $80 million."
McLaughlin, Katy; Clarke, Katherine (February 12, 2020). "Jeff Bezos Buys David Geffen's Los Angeles Mansion for a Record $165 Million". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved February 14, 2020.
CN Squires, C Kriel et al (February 13, 2020) — story, published by Sky News (→ Leadership team), for Sky UK February 2020 - accessed February 13, 2020
Evelyn, Kenya (April 15, 2020). "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos grows fortune by $24bn amid coronavirus pandemic". The Guardian. Retrieved April 15, 2020.
Levi Sumagaysay (November 5, 2013). "Quoted: She Said, He Said — MacKenzie Bezos Vs. Author of Book on Amazon". SiliconBeat. The Mercury News. "I have firsthand knowledge of many of the events. I worked for Jeff (Bezos) at D. E. Shaw"
Bayers, Chip. "The Inner Bezos". Wired. Retrieved August 23, 2013.
"Jeff Bezos Fast Facts". CNN. March 24, 2016.
Nick Wingfield. "Amazon Chief Survives Helicopter Crash in Texas". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
"Amazon founder Jeff Bezos reveals Star Trek Beyond alien cameo". BBC. July 21, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2017.
Vlahos, James (2019). Talk to Me: How Voice Computing Will Transform the Way We Live, Work and Think, p. 40, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Boston and New York, 2019. ISBN 978-1-328-79930-2.
Bezos, Jeff (January 9, 2019). "pic.twitter.com/Gb10BDb0x0". @JeffBezos. Retrieved January 10, 2019.[non-primary source needed]
Snider, Mike (January 9, 2019), "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos and wife MacKenzie to divorce after 25 years of marriage", USA Today
"Jeff and MacKenzie Bezos are getting divorced after 25 years of marriage". CNN. July 21, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2019.
"Jeff Bezos to keep 75 percent of couple's Amazon stock after finalizing divorce". Retrieved March 4, 2019.
Weise, Karen (February 7, 2019). "Jeff Bezos Accuses National Enquirer of 'Extortion and Blackmail'". The New York Times. Retrieved February 7, 2019.
Bezos, Jeff (February 7, 2019). "No thank you, Mr. Pecker". Medium.com. Retrieved February 7, 2019.
Sullivan, Sean (August 7, 2013). "The politics of Jeff Bezos". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
Porterfield, Elaine (July 28, 2012). "Amazon's Jeff Bezos, wife, make $2.5 million donation for gay marriage". Reuters. Retrieved August 23, 2013.
"Amazon.com Contributions to Federal Candidates, 2012 cycles". Center for Responsive Politics. Retrieved March 7, 2018.
La Monica, Paul R. (August 2, 2016). "The Hillary Clinton billionaires club". CNN.
Abramson, Alana. "How to Understand Donald Trump's #AmazonWashingtonPost Tweet in 3 Easy Steps". Fortune. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Stevens, Laura; Nicholas, Peter (April 9, 2018). "Slammed by Trump, Amazon's Jeff Bezos Chooses Silence". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 9, 2018.
Kosoff, Maya. "Why Jeff Bezos Is Dumping Cash into Trump's Swamp". The Hive. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Cillizza, Chris (December 7, 2015). "Donald Trump called out Jeff Bezos on Twitter. Then Bezos called his bluff". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved March 9, 2018.
Solomon, Norman (February 20, 2014). "Why Amazon's collaboration with the CIA is so ominous – and vulnerable". HuffPost. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
Miller, Jason (August 7, 2018). "DoD's $10B cloud contract comes under protest 11 days after final RFP". Federal News Radio.
Jeong, May (August 13, 2018). ""Everybody immediately knew that it was for Amazon": Has Bezos become more powerful in DC than Trump?". Vanity Fair. Retrieved September 14, 2018.
"Microsoft wins Pentagon's $10bn cloud computing contract". The Guardian. October 26, 2019. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
Feldscher, Jacqueline; Overly, Steven (November 14, 2019). "Amazon suing Pentagon over $10B cloud contract, alleging 'bias'". Politico. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
Laperruque, Jake (October 23, 2018). "Amazon Pushes ICE to Buy Its Face Recognition Surveillance Tech". The Daily Beast. Retrieved October 23, 2018.
Brunner, Jim; Romano, Benjamin (October 20, 2019). "Amazon's growing spending on Seattle politics includes a spate of donations from Jeff Bezos' 'S Team'". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
"Saudi crown prince meets Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos in Seattle". Arab News. March 31, 2018.
"Saudi Arabia 'hacked Amazon boss's phone', says investigator". BBC News. March 31, 2019.
Kirchgaessner, Stephanie (January 22, 2020). "Jeff Bezos hack: Amazon boss's phone 'hacked by Saudi crown prince'". The Guardian.
"How Jeff Bezos' iPhone X Was Hacked". The New York Times. Retrieved January 22, 2020.
"Jeff Bezos hack: Saudi Arabia calls claim 'absurd'". BBC. January 22, 2020.
"Fred Hutch receives $35 million donation, largest ever, from Bezos family". The Seattle Times. March 30, 2017. Retrieved April 2, 2019.
Soper, Taylor. "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos and family donate $20M to Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center". GeekWire. Retrieved December 31, 2017.
Kotecki, Peter. "Jeff Bezos is the richest man in modern history – here's how he spends on philanthropy". Business Insider. Retrieved July 1, 2019.
Kim, Eugene (September 16, 2018). "Unanswered questions about Jeff Bezos' new $2 billion philanthropic fund". CNBC. Retrieved July 1, 2019.
Grothaus, Michael (May 24, 2017). "Jeff Bezos just gave $1 million to the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press". Fast Company. Retrieved March 8, 2018.
Kunkle, Frederick (September 1, 2017). "Jeff Bezos wants to give more money to charity. He should pay his workers first". HuffPost. Retrieved September 19, 2018.
Hyde, Marina (September 14, 2018). "If Jeff Bezos wants to help low-income people why not just pay them better?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved December 12, 2019.
Cao, Sissi (June 6, 2018). "What Has Jeff Bezos Chosen to Spend His $140B On? We Have 4 Guesses". Observer. Retrieved June 6, 2018.
Levin, Sam (September 13, 2018). "Jeff Bezos to fund schools where 'child will be the customer' with new charity". The Guardian. Retrieved September 13, 2018.
Stevens, Laura (September 13, 2018). "Jeff Bezos to Create $2 Billion Fund for Homeless, Preschools". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 13, 2018.
Au-Yeung, Angel (September 13, 2018). "Jeff Bezos Unveils Multibillion-Dollar Plans For Charitable Giving". Forbes. Retrieved September 13, 2018.
O'Keefe, Ed; Anderson, Nick (January 12, 2018). "Jeff Bezos donates $33 million to scholarship fund for 'dreamers'". The Washington Post.
Boyle, Alan (June 18, 2018). "Backed by Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos, Breakthrough Energy Ventures places first bets on power storage". GeekWire. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "We are committed to doing our part and filling this capital need by coming together in a new coalition. We will form a network of private capital committed to building a structure that will allow informed decisions to help accelerate the change to the advanced energy future our planet needs. Success requires a partnership of increased government research, with a transparent and workable structure to objectively evaluate those projects, and committed private-sector investors willing to support the innovative ideas that come out of the public research pipeline."
Goldman, David (September 5, 2018). "Jeff Bezos donates $10 million to organization that helps veterans run for office". CNNMoney. Retrieved December 17, 2018.
Jeff Bezos (February 17, 2020), Today, I’m thrilled to announce I am launching the Bezos Earth Fund.⁣⁣⁣ published by Instagram February 17, 2020 @ ~19:00hrs, using "Instagram a new Bezos Earth Fund" in story published by Sky News 17 February 2020 20:25 UK from Jeff Bezos: World's richest man pledges $10bn to fight climate change, published by British Broadcasting Corporation February 17, 2020 @ ~ 20:03 all accessed February 17, 2020
BBC News (April 7, 2020). "Twitter boss pledges $1bn for coronavirus relief". BBC News. Retrieved April 15, 2020.
Evelyn, Kenya (April 15, 2020). "Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos grows fortune by $24bn amid coronavirus pandemic". The Guardian. Retrieved April 15, 2020.

    Schleifer, Theodore (April 2, 2020). "Why Jeff Bezos's $100 million donation to food banks won't satisfy his critics". Vox. Retrieved April 15, 2020.

Sources

    Robinson, Tom (2010). Jeff Bezos: Amazon.com Architect. ABDO Publishing. ISBN 9781604537598.

Further reading

    Boyle, Alan (May 29, 2018). "Jeff Bezos: 'We will have to leave this planet ... and it's going to make this planet better'". GeekWire. Retrieved May 31, 2018.
    Davenport, Christian. The Space Barons: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, and the Quest to Colonize the Cosmos. PublicAffairs (2018). ISBN 978-1610398299.
    Döpfner, Mathias S. (March 28, 2018). "Jeff Bezos reveals what it's like to build an empire". Business Insider. Retrieved April 29, 2018.
    Fernholz, Tim. Rocket Billionaires: Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, and the New Space Race. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (2018). ISBN 978-1-328-66223-1.
    Wingfield, Nick (January 12, 2018). "Jeff Bezos, Mr. Amazon, Steps Out". The New York Times. Retrieved April 29, 2018.
    Wofford, Ben (April 22, 2018). "Inside Jeff Bezos's Washington D.C. Life". Washingtonian. Retrieved April 29, 2018.

External links
Jeff Bezos
at Wikipedia's sister projects

    Media from Wikimedia Commons
    News from Wikinews
    Quotations from Wikiquote
    Data from Wikidata 

    Jeff Bezos at TED Edit this at Wikidata
    Appearances on C-SPAN
    Jeff Bezos on Charlie Rose
    "Jeff Bezos collected news and commentary". The New York Times.
    Bezos Expeditions
    Forbes Profile

Honorary titles
Preceded by
Bill Gates 	World's richest person
2018 	Succeeded by
Present

    vte

Amazon
People	
Current	

    Jeff Bezos Doug Gurr Tony Hsieh Werner Vogels

Former	

    Rick Dalzell Paul Davis Brian McBride Christopher North Nadia Shouraboura Ram Shriram Tom Szkutak Brian Valentine

	
Amazon icon.png
Facilities	

    List of Amazon locations Doppler Day 1 HQ2 Spheres Bellevue 600

Products
and
services	
Subsidiaries	

    A9.com AbeBooks Alexa Internet Amazon Game Studios Amazon Lab126 Amazon Robotics Annapurna Labs Audible Blink Home Book Depository BookFinder ComiXology Digital Photography Review Double Helix Games Fresh Goodreads Graphiq IMDb
        Box Office Mojo Withoutabox PillPack Ring Shopbop Souq.com Twitch Woot.com Zappos

Cloudcomputing	

    Web Services
        AMI Amazon Aurora Beanstalk CloudFront DynamoDB EBS EC2 EFS ElastiCache EMR Glacier Lambda Lightsail MTurk Neptune Product Advertising API RDS Redshift Rekognition Route 53 S3 SageMaker SES SNS SimpleDB SQS VPC

Services	

    Amazon.com
        China Alexa Appstore Digital Game Store Drive Fire OS Payments Prime
        Key Prime Music Prime Now Prime Pantry Prime Video Kindle Store Marketplace Music Silk Storywriter Wireless

Devices	

    Cloud Cam Echo
        Show Echo Buds Fire
        Fire HD Fire HDX Fire TV
        Stick Kindle

Technology	

    1-Click Dynamo Obidos

Media	

    Amazon Publishing Amazon Studios Breakthrough Novel Award Best Books of the Year Kindle Direct Publishing YES Network (15%)

Retail	

    Amazon Books Amazon Go Treasure Truck Whole Foods Market

Logistics	

    Amazon Air Amazon Prime Air

Former	

    43 Things Askville Amapedia Amie Street (Songza) CDNow Dash buttons Dash wand Diapers.com Endless.com Fire Phone Lexcycle Liquavista LivingSocial LoveFilm Mobipocket PlanetAll Reflexive Entertainment Sellaband Shelfari TenMarks

Other	

    Amazon Light ASIN Criticism (tax) Fishbowl History of Amazon LibraryThing List of Amazon brands List of Amazon products and services List of mergers and acquisitions by Amazon Locker MacKenzie Bezos Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc. Statistically improbable phrase Vine

Category Category

    vte

Blue Origin
Launch vehicles	

    New Shepard New Glenn* New Armstrong*

	
Blue Origin new logo.svg
Test vehicles	

    Charon Goddard

Spacecraft	

    Blue Moon*

Rocket engines	

    BE-1 BE-2 BE-3 BE-4* BE-7*

Facilities	

    Kent-Seattle headquarters West Texas launch site Space Launch Complex 36
        Cape Canaveral

Key people	

    Jeff Bezos (founder) Robert Smith (CEO) Jeffrey Ashby (chief of mission assurance)


    This page was last edited on 21 May 2020, at 14:02 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki

Isaac Newton



Sir Isaac Newton FRS ( ) (4 January 1643 – March 31 1727)   [  OS: December 25 1642 – March 20 1727 ]    was an English physicist, mathematician, astronomer, natural philosopher, and alchemist. His treatise Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, published in 1687, described universal gravitation and the three laws of motion, laying the groundwork for classical mechanics, which dominated the scientific view of the physical universe for the next three centuries and is the basis for modern engineering.  He showed that the motions of objects on Earth and of celestial bodies are governed by the same set of natural laws by demonstrating the consistency between Kepler's laws of planetary motion and his theory of gravitation, thus removing the last doubts about heliocentrism and advancing the scientific revolution.

In mechanics, Newton enunciated the principles of conservation of momentum and angular momentum. In optics, he invented the reflecting telescope and developed a theory of colour based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into a visible spectrum.  He also formulated an empirical law of cooling and studied the speed of sound.

In mathematics, Newton shares the credit with Gottfried Leibniz for the development of the calculus. He also demonstrated the generalized binomial theorem, developed the so-called "Newton's method" for approximating the zeroes of a function, and contributed to the study of power series.

In a 2005 poll of the Royal Society of who had the greatest effect on the history of science, Newton was deemed more influential than Albert Einstein.




Newton in a 1702 portrait by Godfrey Kneller. Isaac Newton was born on January 4, 1643   [ OS: December 25, 1642 ]    at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire. At the time of Newton's birth, England had not adopted the latest papal calendar and therefore his date of birth was recorded as Christmas Day, December 25, 1642. Newton was born three months after the death of his father. Born prematurely, he was a small child; his mother Hannah Ayscough reportedly said that he could have fit inside a quart mug. When Newton was three, his mother remarried and went to live with her new husband, the Reverend Barnabus Smith, leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough. The young Isaac disliked his stepfather and held some enmity towards his mother for marrying him, as revealed by this entry in a list of sins committed up to the age of 19:  Threatening my father and mother Smith to burn them and the house over them. Cohen, I.B. (1970). Dictionary of Scientific Biography, Vol. 11, p.43. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons

Newton may have suffered from Asperger syndrome, a form of autism.

According to E.T. Bell and H. Eves:
 Newton began his schooling in the village schools and was later sent to The King's School, Grantham, where he became the top student in the school. At King's, he lodged with the local apothecary, William Clarke and eventually became engaged to the apothecary's stepdaughter, Anne Storer, before he went off to the University of Cambridge at the age of 19. As Newton became engrossed in his studies, the romance cooled and Miss Storer married someone else. It is said he kept a warm memory of this love, but Newton had no other recorded "sweet-hearts" and never married.

There are a rumours that he remained a virgin.  Book Review Isaac Newton biography December 2003  However, Bell and Eves' sources for this claim, William Stukeley and Mrs. Vincent (the former Miss Storer   actually named Katherine, not Anne), merely say that Newton entertained "a passion" for Storer while he lodged at the Clarke house.

From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen, Newton was educated at The King's School, Grantham (where his signature can still be seen upon a library window sill). He was removed from school, and by October 1659, he was to be found at Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, where his mother, widowed by now for a second time, attempted to make a farmer of him. He was, by later reports of his contemporaries, thoroughly unhappy with the work. It appears to have been Henry Stokes, master at the King's School, who persuaded his mother to send him back to school so that he might complete his education. This he did at the age of eighteen, achieving an admirable final report.

In June 1661, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge. At that time, the college's teachings were based on those of Aristotle, but Newton preferred to read the more advanced ideas of modern philosophers such as Descartes and astronomers such as Galileo, Copernicus and Kepler. In 1665, he discovered the generalized binomial theorem and began to develop a mathematical theory that would later become calculus. Soon after Newton had obtained his degree in April of 1665, the University closed down as a precaution against the Great Plague. For the next 2 years, Newton worked at his home in Woolsthorpe on calculus, optics and the law of gravitation.




Isaac Newton (Bolton, Sarah K. Famous Men of Science. NY: Thomas Y. Crowell & Co., 1889)



Most modern historians believe that Newton and Leibniz had developed calculus independently, using their own unique notations. According to Newton's inner circle, Newton had worked out his method years before Leibniz, yet he published almost nothing about it until 1693, and did not give a full account until 1704. Meanwhile, Leibniz began publishing a full account of his methods in 1684. Moreover, Leibniz's notation and "differential Method" were universally adopted on the Continent, and after 1820 or so, in the British Empire. Whereas Leibniz's notebooks show the advancement of the ideas from early stages until maturity, there is only the end product in Newton's known notes. Newton claimed that he had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared being mocked for it . Newton had a very close relationship with Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, who from the beginning was impressed by Newton's gravitational theory. In 1691 Duillier planned to prepare a new version of Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, but never finished it. Some of Newton's biographers have suggested that the relationship may have been romantic.  Biography of Isaac Newton at  www.knittingcircle.org.uk   However, in 1694 the relationship between the two men cooled down. At the time, Duillier had also exchanged several letters with Leibniz.

Starting in 1699, other members of the Royal Society (of which Newton was a member) accused Leibniz of plagiarism, and the dispute broke out in full force in 1711. Newton's Royal Society proclaimed in a study that it was Newton who was the true discoverer and labeled Leibniz a fraud. This study was cast into doubt when it was later found that Newton himself wrote the study's concluding remarks on Leibniz. Thus began the bitter Newton v. Leibniz calculus controversy, which marred the lives of both Newton and Leibniz until the latter's death in 1716.

Newton is generally credited with the generalized binomial theorem, valid for any exponent. He discovered Newton's identities, Newton's method, classified cubic plane curves (polynomials of degree three in two variables), made substantial contributions to the theory of finite differences, and was the first to use fractional indices and to employ coordinate geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations. He approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms (a precursor to Euler's summation formula), and was the first to use power series with confidence and to revert power series. He also discovered a new formula for calculating pi.

He was elected Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 1669. In that day, any fellow of Cambridge or Oxford had to be an ordained Anglican priest. However, the terms of the Lucasian professorship required that the holder not be active in the church (presumably so as to have more time for science). Newton argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement, and Charles II, whose permission was needed, accepted this argument. Thus a conflict between Newton's religious views and Anglican orthodoxy was averted.




From 1670 to 1672, Newton lectured on optics. During this period he investigated the refraction of light, demonstrating that a prism could decompose white light into a spectrum of colours, and that a lens and a second prism could recompose the multicoloured spectrum into white light. 
A replica of Newton's 6-inch reflecting telescope of 1672 for the Royal Society.
He also showed that the coloured light does not change its properties, by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various objects.  Newton noted that regardless of whether it was reflected or scattered or transmitted, it stayed the same colour. Thus the colours we observe are the result of how objects interact with the incident already-coloured light, not the result of objects generating the colour. For more details, see Newton's theory of colour.

From this work he concluded that any refracting telescope would suffer from the dispersion of light into colours, and invented a reflecting telescope (today known as a Newtonian telescope) to bypass that problem. By grinding his own mirrors, using Newton's rings to judge the quality of the optics for his telescopes, he was able to produce a superior instrument to the refracting telescope, due primarily to the wider diameter of the mirror. In 1671 the Royal Society asked for a demonstration of his reflecting telescope. Their interest encouraged him to publish his notes On Colour, which he later expanded into his Opticks. When Robert Hooke criticised some of Newton's ideas, Newton was so offended that he withdrew from public debate. The two men remained enemies until Hooke's death.

Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles and were refracted by accelerating toward the denser medium, but he had to associate them with waves to explain the diffraction of light (Opticks Bk. II, Props. XII-L). Later physicists instead favoured a purely wavelike explanation of light to account for diffraction. Today's quantum mechanics, photons and the idea of wave-particle duality bear only a minor resemblance to Newton's understanding of light.

In his Hypothesis of Light of 1675, Newton posited the existence of the ether to transmit forces between particles. The contact with the theosophist Henry More, revived his interest in alchemy. He replaced the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and repulsion between particles. John Maynard Keynes, who acquired many of Newton's writings on alchemy, stated that "Newton was not the first of the age of reason: he was the last of the magicians."    Newton's interest in alchemy cannot be isolated from his contributions to science.   notes that Newton apparently abandoned his alchemical researches.  (This was at a time when there was no clear distinction between alchemy and science.) Had he not relied on the occult idea of action at a distance, across a vacuum, he might not have developed his theory of gravity. (See also Isaac Newton's occult studies.)

In 1704 Newton wrote Opticks, in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light. He considered light to be made up of extremely subtle corpuscles, that ordinary matter was made of grosser corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical transmutation "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another, ...and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the Particles of Light which enter their Composition?"   quoting Opticks   Newton also constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator, using a glass globe (Optics, 8th Query).



Newton's own copy of his Principia, with hand-written corrections for the second edition.

In 1677, Newton returned to his work on mechanics, i.e., gravitation and its effect on the orbits of planets, with reference to Kepler's laws of planetary motion, and consulting with Hooke and Flamsteed on the subject. He published his results in De Motu Corporum (1684). This contained the beginnings of the laws of motion that would inform the Principia.

The Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (now known as the Principia) was published on 5 July 1687 with encouragement and financial help from Edmond Halley. In this work Newton stated the three universal laws of motion that were not to be improved upon for more than two hundred years. He used the Latin word gravitas (weight) for the force that would become known as gravity, and defined the law of universal gravitation. In the same work he presented the first analytical determination, based on Boyle's law, of the speed of sound in air.

With the Principia, Newton became internationally recognised. He acquired a circle of admirers, including the Swiss-born mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, with whom he formed an intense relationship that lasted until 1693. The end of this friendship led Newton to a nervous breakdown.




Isaac Newton in 1712. Portrait by Sir James Thornhill.

In the 1690s Newton wrote a number of religious tracts dealing with the literal interpretation of the Bible. Henry More's belief in the universe and rejection of Cartesian dualism may have influenced Newton's religious ideas. A manuscript he sent to John Locke in which he disputed the existence of the Trinity was never published. Later works — The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) and Observations Upon the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse of St. John (1733) — were published after his death. He also devoted a great deal of time to alchemy (see above).

Newton was also a member of the Parliament of England from 1689 to 1690 and in 1701, but his only recorded comments were to complain about a cold draft in the chamber and request that the window be closed.

Newton moved to London to take up the post of warden of the Royal Mint in 1696, a position that he had obtained through the patronage of Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, then Chancellor of the Exchequer. He took charge of England's great recoining, somewhat treading on the toes of Master Lucas (and securing the job of deputy comptroller of the temporary Chester branch for Edmond Halley). Newton became perhaps the best-known Master of the Mint upon Lucas' death in 1699, a position Newton held until his death.  These appointments were intended as sinecures, but Newton took them seriously, retiring from his Cambridge duties in 1701, and exercising his power to reform the currency and punish clippers and counterfeiters. As Master of the Mint in 1717 Newton unofficially moved the Pound Sterling from the silver standard to the gold standard by creating a relationship between gold coins and the silver penny in the "Law of Queen Anne"; these were all great reforms at the time, adding considerably to the wealth and stability of England.  It was his work at the Mint, rather than his earlier contributions to science, that earned him a knighthood from Queen Anne in 1705.
Newton's grave in Westminster Abbey
Newton was made President of the Royal Society in 1703 and an associate of the French Académie des Sciences. In his position at the Royal Society, Newton made an enemy of John Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, by prematurely publishing Flamsteed's star catalogue, which Newton had used in his studies.

Newton died in London on March 31, 1727   [ OS: March 20, 1727 ]   , and was buried in Westminster Abbey. His half-niece, Catherine Barton Conduitt, Westfall 1980, p. 44.  served as his hostess in social affairs at his house on Jermyn Street in London; he was her "very loving Uncle," Westfall 1980, p. 595  according to his letter to her when she was recovering from smallpox.  Although Newton, who had no children, had divested much of his estate onto relatives in his last years he actually died intestate.

After his death, Newton's body was discovered to have had massive amounts of mercury in it, probably resulting from his alchemical pursuits. Mercury poisoning could explain Newton's eccentricity in late life.




Although the laws of motion and universal gravitation became Newton's best-known discoveries, he warned against using them to view the universe as a mere machine, as if akin to a great clock. He said, "Gravity explains the motions of the planets, but it cannot explain who set the planets in motion. God governs all things and knows all that is or can be done."

His scientific fame notwithstanding, Newton's studies of the Bible and of the early Church Fathers were also noteworthy.  Newton wrote works on textual criticism, most notably An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture. He also placed the crucifixion of Jesus Christ at 3 April, AD 33, which agrees with one traditionally accepted date. John P. Meier, A Marginal Jew, v. 1, pp. 382–402 after narrowing the years to 30 or 33, provisionally judges 30 most likely.  He also attempted, unsuccessfully, to find hidden messages within the Bible (see Bible code).

Newton may have rejected the church's doctrine of the Trinity. In a minority view, T.C. Pfizenmaier argues that he more likely held the Eastern Orthodox view of the Trinity rather than the Western one held by Roman Catholics, Anglicans, and most Protestants.    In his own day, he was also accused of being a Rosicrucian (as were many in the Royal Society and in the court of Charles II).

In his own lifetime, Newton wrote more on religion than he did on natural science. He believed in a rationally immanent world, but he rejected the hylozoism implicit in Leibniz and Baruch Spinoza. Thus, the ordered and dynamically informed universe could be understood, and must be understood, by an active reason, but this universe, to be perfect and ordained, had to be regular.



"Newton," by William Blake; here, Newton is depicted as a "divine geometer"
Newton and Robert Boyle’s mechanical philosophy was promoted by rationalist pamphleteers as a viable alternative to the pantheists and enthusiasts, and was accepted hesitantly by orthodox preachers as well as dissident preachers like the latitudinarians.    Thus, the clarity and simplicity of science was seen as a way to combat the emotional and metaphysical superlatives of both superstitious enthusiasm and the threat of atheism,    and, at the same time, the second wave of English deists used Newton's discoveries to demonstrate the possibility of a "Natural Religion."

The attacks made against pre-Enlightenment "magical thinking," and the mystical elements of Christianity, were given their foundation with Boyle’s mechanical conception of the universe. Newton gave Boyle’s ideas their completion through mathematical proofs and, perhaps more importantly, was very successful in popularising them.    Newton refashioned the world governed by an interventionist God into a world crafted by a God that designs along rational and universal principles.    These principles were available for all people to discover, allowed people to pursue their own aims fruitfully in this life, not the next, and to perfect themselves with their own rational powers.

Newton saw God as the master creator whose existence could not be denied in the face of the grandeur of all creation. Principia, Book III; cited in; Newton’s Philosophy of Nature: Selections from his writings, p. 42, ed. H.S. Thayer, Hafner Library of Classics, NY, 1953.  A Short Scheme of the True Religion, manuscript quoted in Memoirs of the Life, Writings and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton by Sir David Brewster, Edinburgh, 1850; cited in; ibid, p. 65.  Webb, R.K. ed. Knud Haakonssen. “The emergence of Rational Dissent.” Enlightenment and Religion: Rational Dissent in eighteenth-century Britain. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: 1996. p19.  But the unforeseen theological consequence of his conception of God, as Leibniz pointed out, was that God was now entirely removed from the world’s affairs, since the need for intervention would only evidence some imperfection in God’s creation, something impossible for a perfect and omnipotent creator.  Westfall, Richard S. Science and Religion in Seventeenth-Century England. p201.  Leibniz's theodicy cleared God from the responsibility for "l'origine du mal" by making God removed from participation in his creation. The understanding of the world was now brought down to the level of simple human reason, and humans, as Odo Marquard argued, became responsible for the correction and elimination of evil. Marquard, Odo. "Burdened and Disemburdened Man and the Flight into Unindictability," in Farewell to Matters of Principle. Robert M. Wallace trans. London: Oxford UP, 1989.

On the other hand, latitudinarian and Newtonian ideas taken too far resulted in the millenarians, a religious faction dedicated to the concept of a mechanical universe, but finding in it the same enthusiasm and mysticism that the Enlightenment had fought so hard to extinguish. Jacob, Margaret C. The Newtonians and the English Revolution: 1689–1720. p100–101.




In a manuscript he wrote in 1704 in which he describes his attempts to extract scientific information from the Bible, he estimated that the world would end no earlier than 2060. In predicting this he said, "This I mention not to assert when the time of the end shall be, but to put a stop to the rash conjectures of fanciful men who are frequently predicting the time of the end, and by doing so bring the sacred prophesies into discredit as often as their predictions fail."



As warden of the Royal Mint, Newton estimated that 20% of the coins taken in during The Great Recoinage were counterfeit. Counterfeiting was high treason, punishable by being hanged, drawn and quartered. Despite this, convictions of the most flagrant criminals could be extremely difficult to achieve; however, Newton proved to be equal to the task.

He gathered much of that evidence himself, disguised, while he hung out at bars and taverns. For all the barriers placed to prosecution, and separating the branches of government, English law still had ancient and formidable customs of authority. Newton was made a justice of the peace and between June 1698 and Christmas 1699 conducted some 200 cross-examinations of witnesses, informers and suspects. Newton won his convictions and in February 1699, he had ten prisoners waiting to be executed.

Possibly Newton's greatest triumph as the king's attorney was against William Chaloner. One of Chaloner's schemes was to set up phony conspiracies of Catholics and then turn in the hapless conspirators whom he entrapped. Chaloner made himself rich enough to posture as a gentleman. Petitioning Parliament, Chaloner accused the Mint of providing tools to counterfeiters (a charge also made by others). He proposed that he be allowed to inspect the Mint's processes in order to improve them. He petitioned Parliament to adopt his plans for a coinage that could not be counterfeited, while at the same time striking false coins. Newton was outraged, and went about the work to uncover anything about Chaloner. During his studies, he found that Chaloner was engaged in counterfeiting. He immediately put Chaloner on trial, but Mr Chaloner had friends in high places, and to Newton's horror, Chaloner walked free. Newton put him on trial a second time with conclusive evidence. Chaloner was convicted of high treason and hanged, drawn and quartered on March 23 1699 at Tyburn gallows. Westfall 1980, pp. 571–5



Enlightenment philosophers chose a short history of scientific predecessors—Galileo, Boyle, and Newton principally—as the guides and guarantors of their applications of the singular concept of Nature and Natural Law to every physical and social field of the day. In this respect, the lessons of history and the social structures built upon it could be discarded. Cassels, Alan. Ideology and International Relations in the Modern World. p2.

It was Newton’s conception of the universe based upon Natural and rationally understandable laws that became the seed for Enlightenment ideology. Locke and Voltaire applied concepts of Natural Law to political systems advocating intrinsic rights; the physiocrats and Adam Smith applied Natural conceptions of psychology and self-interest to economic systems and the sociologists criticised the current social order for trying to fit history into Natural models of progress.  Monboddo and Samuel Clarke resisted elements of Newton's work, but eventually rationalised it to conform with their strong religious views of nature.




The famous three laws of motion:
# Newton's First Law (also known as the Law of Inertia) states that an object at rest tends to stay at rest and that an object in uniform motion tends to stay in uniform motion unless acted upon by a net external force.
# Newton's Second Law states that an applied force,   F  , on an object equals the time rate of change of its momentum,   p  . Mathematically, this is written as   \vec F = \frac{d\vec p}{dt} \, = \, \frac{d}{dt} (m \vec v) \, = \, \vec v \, \frac{dm}{dt} + m \, \frac{d\vec v}{dt} \,.    Assuming the mass to be constant, the first term vanishes. Defining the acceleration to be  \vec a \ =\  d\vec v/dt   results in the famous equation   \vec F = m \, \vec a \,  which states that the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the magnitude of the net force acting on the object and inversely proportional to its mass. In the MKS system of measurement, mass is given in kilograms, acceleration in metres per second squared, and force in newtons (named in his honour).
# Newton's Third Law states that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.



A reputed descendant of Newton's apple tree, found in the Botanic Gardens in Cambridge.

A popular story claims that Newton was inspired to formulate his theory of universal gravitation by the fall of an apple from a tree.  Cartoons have gone further to suggest the apple actually hit Newton's head, and that its impact somehow made him aware of the force of gravity.  John Conduitt, Newton's assistant at the Royal Mint and husband of Newton's niece, described the event when he wrote about Newton's life:

The question was not whether gravity existed, but whether it extended so far from Earth that it could also be the force holding the moon to its orbit. Newton showed that if the force decreased as the inverse square of the distance, one could indeed calculate the Moon's orbital period, and get good agreement. He guessed the same force was responsible for other orbital motions, and hence named it "universal gravitation".

A contemporary writer, William Stukeley, recorded in his Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life a conversation with Newton in Kensington on 15 April 1726, in which Newton recalled "when formerly, the notion of gravitation came into his mind. It was occasioned by the fall of an apple, as he sat in contemplative mood. Why should that apple always descend perpendicularly to the ground, thought he to himself. Why should it not go sideways or upwards, but constantly to the earth's centre." In similar terms, Voltaire wrote in his Essay on Epic Poetry (1727), "Sir Isaac Newton walking in his gardens, had the first thought of his system of gravitation, upon seeing an apple falling from a tree." These accounts are probably exaggerations of Newton's own tale about sitting by a window in his home (Woolsthorpe Manor) and watching an apple fall from a tree.

Various trees are claimed to be "the" apple tree which Newton describes. The King's School, Grantham, claims that the tree was purchased by the school, uprooted and transported to the headmaster's garden some years later, the staff of the [now] National Trust-owned Woolsthorpe Manor dispute this, and claim that a tree present in their gardens is the one described by Newton. A descendant of the original tree can be seen growing outside the main gate of Trinity College, Cambridge, below the room Newton lived in when he studied there. The National Fruit Collection at Brogdale  /ref> can supply grafts from their tree (ref 1948-729), which appears identical to Flower of Kent, a coarse-fleshed cooking variety.



* Short Chronicle, The System of the World, Optical Lectures, The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms, Amended and De mundi systemate were published posthumously in 1728.




French mathematician Joseph-Louis Lagrange often said that Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived, and once added that he was also "the most fortunate, for we cannot find more than once a system of the world to establish." Fred L. Wilson, History of Science: Newton citing: Delambre, M. "Notice sur la vie et les ouvrages de M. le comte J. L. Lagrange," Oeuvres de Lagrange I. Paris, 1867, p. xx.  English poet Alexander Pope was moved by Newton's accomplishments to write the famous epitaph:

Newton himself was rather more modest of his own achievements, famously writing in a letter to Robert Hooke in February 1676

Historians generally think the above quote was an attack on Hooke (who was short and hunchbacked), rather than - or in addition to - a statement of modesty. The two were in a dispute over optical discoveries at the time. The latter interpretation also fits with many of his other disputes over his discoveries - such as the question of who discovered calculus as discussed above.

And then in a memoir later



*"The Invisible Science." Magical Egypt. Chance Gardner and John Anthony West. 2005.



*Berlinski, David, Newton's Gift: How Sir Isaac Newton Unlocked the System of our World, ISBN 0-684-84392-7 (hardback), also in paperback, Simon & Schuster, (2000).
* Christianson, Gale E. In the Presence of the Creator: Isaac Newton and His Times. Collier MacMillan, (1984). 608 pages. 
* Dampier, William C. & M. Dampier. Readings in the Literature of Science. Harper & Row, New York, (1959).
*Gjertsen, Derek. The Newton Handbook, Routledge & Kegan Paul, (1986).
* Gleick, James. Isaac Newton. Knopf, (2003). hardcover, 288 pages, ISBN 0-375-42233-1.
* Hawking, Stephen, ed.  On the Shoulders of Giants.  ISBN 0-7624-1348-4 Places selections from Newton's Principia in the context of selected writings by Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo and Einstein.
* Hart, Michael J. The 100. Carol Publishing Group, (July 1992), paperback, 576 pages, ISBN 0-8065-1350-0.
* Kandaswamy, Anand M.  The Newton/Leibniz Conflict in Context.  
* Keynes, John Maynard.  Essays in Biography.  W W Norton & Co, 1963, paperback, ISBN 0-393-00189-X. Keynes had taken a close interest in Newton and owned many of Newton's private papers.
* Newton, Isaac. Papers and Letters in Natural Philosophy, edited by I. Bernard Cohen. Harvard University Press, 1958,1978. ISBN 0-674-46853-8. 
* Shapley, Harlow, S. Rapport, and H. Wright. A Treasury of Science; "Newtonia" pp. 147–9; "Discoveries" pp. 150-4. Harper & Bros., New York, (1946).
* Simmons, J.  The giant book of scientists -- The 100 greatest minds of all time, Sydney: The Book Company, (1996).
* Richard de Villamil. Newton, The man. G.D. Knox, London, 1931. Preface by Albert Einstein. Reprinted by Johnson Reprint Corporation, New York (1972).  
*Whiteside, D. T. The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton - 8 volumes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, (1967–81).
*Cohen, I. B. (1980). The Newtonian Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
*Dobbs, B. J. T. (1975). The Foundations of Newton's Alchemy or "The Hunting of the Greene Lyon." Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Halley, E. (1687). "Review of Newton's Principia." Philosophical Transactions 186:291–297. 
*Herivel, J. W. (1965). The Background to Newton's Principia. A Study of Newton's Dynamical Researches in the Years 1664–84. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
*Koyré, A. (1965). Newtonian Studies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
*Maclaurin, C. (1748). An Account of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophical Discoveries, in Four Books. London: A. Millar and J. Nourse.
*Newton, I. (1934). Sir Isaac Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy and His System of the World, tr. A. Motte, rev. F. Cajori. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
*Newton, I. (1952). Opticks, or A Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections & Colours of Light. New York: Dover Publications.
*Newton, I. (1958). Isaac Newton's Papers and Letters on Natural Philosophy and Related Documents, eds. I. B. Cohen and R. E. Schofield. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
*Newton, I. (1959–1977). The Correspondence of Isaac Newton, eds. H. W. Turnbull, J. F. Scott, A. R. Hall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Newton, I. (1962). The Unpublished Scientific Papers of Isaac Newton: A Selection from the Portsmouth Collection in the University Library, Cambridge, ed. A. R. Hall and M. B. Hall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Newton, I. (1967). The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton, ed. D. T. Whiteside. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Newton, I. (1975). Isaac Newton's 'Theory of the Moon's Motion' (1702). London: Dawson. 
*Pemberton, H. (1728). A View of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy. London: S. Palmer. 
*Stukeley, W. (1936). Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life, ed. A. H. White. London: Taylor and Francis. 
*Westfall, R. S. (1971). Force in Newton's Physics: The Science of Dynamics in the Seventeenth Century. London: Macdonald.
*Shamos, Morris H. (1959). Great Experiments in Physics. New York: Henry Holt and Company, Inc.








*  The Mind of Isaac Newton By combining images, audio, animations and interactive segments, the application gives students a sense of Newton's multifaceted mind.
*  Newton's First ODE - A study by  Phaser Scientific Software on how Newton approximated the solutions of a first-order ODE using infinite series.
*  Newton's Dark Secrets NOVA TV programme.
*  Isaac Newton on £1 note.





James_Watt



James Watt (January 19 1736   August 19 1819) was a Scottish inventor and engineer whose improvements to the steam engine were fundamental to the changes wrought by the Industrial Revolution.




James Watt was born on 19th of January, 1736 in Greenock, a seaport on the Firth of Clyde. His father was a shipwright, ship owner and contractor, while his mother, Agnus Muirhead, came from a distinguished family and was well educated. Both were Presbyterians and strong Covenanters.

Watt attended school irregularly but instead he was mostly schooled at home by his mother. He exhibited great manual dexterity and an aptitude for mathematics, while Latin and Greek left him cold, and he absorbed the legends and lore of the Scottish people.

When he was 17, his mother died and his father's health had begun to fail.  Watt travelled to London to study instrument-making for a year, then returned to Scotland   to Glasgow   intent on setting up his own instrument-making business. However, because he had not served at least seven years as an apprentice, the Glasgow Guild of Hammermen (any artisans using hammers) blocked his application, despite there being no other mathematical instrument makers in Scotland.

Watt was saved from this impasse by three professors of the University of Glasgow, who offered him the opportunity to set up a small workshop within the university. It was established in 1758 and one of the professors, the physicist and chemist Joseph Black, became Watt's friend.

In 1764, Watt married his cousin Margaret Miller, with whom he had five children, two of whom lived to adulthood.  She died in childbirth in 1772. In 1777 he married again, to Ann MacGregor, daughter of a Glasgow dye-maker, who survived him. She died in 1832.

Watt had a brother by the name of John. He was shipwrecked when James was 17.

Four years after opening his shop, Watt began to experiment with steam after his friend, Professor John Robison, called his attention to it.  At this point Watt had still never seen an operating steam engine, but he tried constructing a model.  It failed to work satisfactorily, but he continued his experiments and began to read everything about it he could.  He independently discovered the importance of latent heat in understanding the engine, which, unknown to him, Black had famously discovered some years before.  He learned that the University owned a model Newcomen engine, but it was in London for repairs.  Watt got the university to have it returned, and he made the repairs in 1763.  It too just barely worked, and after much experimentation he showed that about 80% of the heat of the steam was consumed in heating the cylinder, because the steam in it was condensed by an injected stream of cold water. His critical insight, to cause the steam to condense in a separate chamber apart from the piston, and to maintain the temperature of the cylinder at the same temperature as the injected steam, came finally in 1765 and he soon had a working model.

Now came a long struggle to produce a full-scale engine.  This required more capital, some of which came from Black.  More substantial backing came from John Roebuck, the founder of the celebrated Carron Iron Works, near Falkirk, with whom he now formed a partnership.  But the principal difficulty was in machining the piston and cylinder.  Iron workers of the day were more like blacksmiths than machinists, so the results left much to be desired.  Much capital was spent in pursuing the ground-breaking patent, which in those days required an act of parliament.  Strapped for resources, Watt was forced to take up employment as a surveyor for eight years.  Roebuck went bankrupt, and Matthew Boulton, who owned the Soho foundry works near Birmingham, acquired his patent rights.  Watt and Boulton formed a hugely successful partnership (Boulton & Watt), which lasted for the next twenty-five years.

Watt finally had access to some of the best iron workers in the world. The difficulty of the manufacture of a large cylinder with a tightly fitting piston was solved by John Wilkinson who had developed precision boring techniques for cannon making at Bersham, near Wrexham, North Wales. Finally, in 1776, the first engines were installed and working in commercial enterprises. These first engines were used for pumps and produced only reciprocating motion.  Orders began to pour in and for the next five years Watt was very busy installing more engines, mostly in Cornwall for pumping water out of mines.

The field of application of the invention was greatly widened only after Boulton urged Watt to convert the reciprocating motion of the piston to produce rotational power for grinding, weaving and milling.  Although a crank seemed the logical and obvious solution to the conversion Watt and Boulton were stymied by a patent for this, whose holder, James Pickard, and associates proposed to cross-license the external condensor.  Watt adamantly opposed this and they circumvented the patent by their sun and planet gear in 1781.

Over the next six years, he made a number of other improvements and modifications to the steam engine.  A double acting engine, in which the steam acted alternately on the two sides of the piston was one.  A throttle valve to control the power of the engine, and a centrifugal governor to keep it from "running away" were very important.  He described methods for working the steam expansively.  A compound engine, which connected two or more engines was described.  Two more patents were granted for these in 1781 and 1782.  Numerous other improvements that made for easier manufacture and installation were continually implemented.  One of these included the use of the steam indicator which produced an informative plot of the pressure in the cylinder against its volume, which he kept as a trade secret.  Another important invention, one of which Watt was most proud of, was the Parallel motion / three-bar linkage which was especially important in double-acting engines as it produced the straight line motion required for the cylinder rod and pump, from the connected rocking beam, whose end moves in a circular arc. This was patented in 1784. These improvements taken together produced an engine which was up to five times as efficient in its use of fuel as the Newcomen engine.

Because of the danger of exploding boilers and the ongoing issues with leaks, Watt was opposed from the first to the use of high pressure steam--all of his engines used steam at very low pressure.

In 1794 the partners established Boulton and Watt to exclusively manufacture steam engines, and this became a large enterprise.  By 1824 it had produced 1164 steam engines having a total nominal horsepower of about 26,000. Carnegie, p 195    Boulton proved to be an excellent businessman, and both men eventually made fortunes.




Watt was an enthusiastic inventor, with a fertile imagination that sometimes got in the way of finishing his works, because he could always see "just one more improvement."  He was skilled with his hands, and was also able to perform systematic scientific measurements that could quantify the improvements he made and produce a greater understanding of the phenomenon he was working 
with.

Watt was a gentleman, greatly respected by other prominent men of the Industrial Revolution. He was an important member of the Lunar Society, and was a much sought after conversationalist and companion, always interested in expanding his horizons.  He was a rather poor businessman, and especially hated bargaining and negotiating terms with those who sought to utilize the steam engine.  Until he retired, he was always much concerned about his financial affairs, and was something of a worrier. His personal relationships with his friends and partners were always congenial and long-lasting.



Watt retired in 1800, the same year that his fundamental patent and partnership with Boulton expired. The famous partnership was transferred to the men's sons, Matthew Boulton and James Watt Jr. William Murdoch was made a partner and the firm prospered.

Watt continued to invent other things before and during his semi-retirement. He invented a new method of measuring distances by telescope, a device for copying letters, improvements in the oil lamp, a steam mangle and a machine for copying sculptures.

He and his second wife travelled to France and Germany, and he purchased an estate in Wales, which he much improved.

He died in his home "Heathfield" in Handsworth, Staffordshire on August 19 1819 at the age of 83.



As with many major inventions, there is some dispute as to whether Watt was the original sole inventor of some of the numerous inventions he patented. There is no dispute, however, that he was the sole inventor of his most important invention, the separate condenser.  It was his practice (from around the 1780s) to pre-empt others' ideas which were known to him by filing patents with the intention of securing credit for the invention for himself, and ensuring that no one else was able to practice it. As he states in a letter to Boulton of August 17 1784: 

Some argue that his prohibitions on his employee William Murdoch from working with high pressure steam on his steam locomotive experiments delayed its development. Watt, with his partner Matthew Boulton, battled against rival engineers such as Jonathan Hornblower who tried to develop engines which did not fall foul of his patents.

Watt patented the  application of the sun and planet gear to steam in 1781 and a steam locomotive in 1784, both of which have strong claims to have been invented by his employee, William Murdoch.  Watt himself described the provenance of the invention of the sun and planet gear in a letter to Boulton from Watt dated January 5 1782:
The patent was never contested by Murdoch, who remained an employee of Boulton and Watt for most of his life, and Boulton and Watt's firm continued to use the sun and planet gear in their rotative engines, even long after the patent for the crank expired in 1794.



James Watt's improved steam engine transformed the Newcomen engine, which had hardly changed for fifty years, into a source of power that transformed the world of work, and was the key innovation that brought forth the Industrial Revolution.  The importance of the invention can hardly be overstated--it gave us the modern world.  A key feature of it was that it brought the engine out of the remote coal fields into factories where many mechanics, engineers, and even tinkerers were exposed to its virtues and limitations.  It was a platform for generations of inventors to improve.  It was clear to many that higher pressures produced in improved boilers would produce engines having even higher efficiency, and would lead to the revolution in transportation that was soon embodied in the locomotive and steamboat.  It made possible the construction of new factories that, since they were not dependent on water power, could work the year round, and could be placed almost anywhere.  Work was moved out of the cottages, resulting in economies of scale.  Capital could work more efficiently, and manufacturing productivity greatly improved.  It made possible the cascade of new sorts of  machine tools that could be used to produce better machines, including that most remarkable of all of them, the Watt steam engine.
Watt celebrated as a statue in Chamberlain Square, outside Birmingham Central Library



Watt was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and the Royal Society of London.  He was a member of the Batavian Society, and one of only eight Foreign Associates of the French Academy of Sciences.



Watt was buried in the grounds of St. Mary's Church, Handsworth, in Birmingham. Later expansion of the church, over his grave, means that his tomb is now buried inside the church.  A statue of him, Boulton and Murdoch is in Birmingham, as are two other statues of him alone, one in Chamberlain Square, the other outside the Law Courts. He is also remembered by the Moonstones and a school is named in his honour, both in Birmingham. An extensive archive of his papers is held at Birmingham Central Library. Matthew Boulton's home, Soho House, is now a museum, commemorating the work of both men. The University of Glasgow's Faculty of Engineering, the oldest in the United Kingdom, (where Watt was a professor) has its headquarters in the James Watt Building, which also houses the department of Mechanical Engineering and the department of Aerospace Engineering.

The location of James Watt's birth in Greenock is commemorated by a statue, close to his birthplace. Several locations and street names in Greenock recall him, most notably the Watt Memorial Library, which was begun in 1816 with Watt's donation of scientific books, and developed as part of the Watt Institution by his son (which ultimately became the James Watt College). Taken over by the local authority in 1974, the library now also houses the local history collection and archives of Inverclyde, and is dominated by a large seated statue in the vestibule. Watt is additionally commemorated by statuary in George Square, Glasgow and Princes Street, Edinburgh.

The James Watt College has expanded from its original location to include campuses in Kilwinning (North Ayrshire), Finnart Street and The Waterfront in Greenock, and the Sports campus in Largs. The Heriot-Watt University near Edinburgh was at one time the "Watt Institution and School of Arts" named in his memory, then merged with George Heriot's Hospital for needy orphans and the name was changed to Heriot-Watt College. Dozens of university and college buildings (chiefly of science and technology) are named after him.

The huge painting James Watt contemplating the steam engine by James Eckford Lauder is now owned by the National Gallery of Scotland.

Watt was ranked first, tying with Edison, among 229 significant figures in the history of technology by Charles Murray's survey of historiometry presented in his book Human Accomplishments. Watt was ranked 22nd in Michael H. Hart's list of the most influential figures in history.

The SI unit of power, the watt, is named after him, as are over 50 roads or streets in the UK.

A colossal statue of him by Chantrey was placed in Westminster Abbey, and on this cenotaph the inscription reads:




A lecture theatre in the Mechanical & Manufacturing Engineering building at the University of Birmingham is named 'G31 - The James Watt Lecture Theatre'



*Dickenson, H. W., James Watt: Craftsman and Engineer Cambridge University Press (1935). 
*J. P. Muirhead, Origin and Progress of the Mechanical Inventions of James Watt (London, 1854).  
*J. P. Muirhead, Life of Watt (London, 1858).  
*Samuel Smiles, Lives of the Engineers, (London, 1861-62, new edition, five volumes, 1905).  
*"Some Unpublished Letters of James Watt" in Journal of Institution of Mechanical Engineers (London, 1915).  
*Carnegie, Andrew, James Watt University Press of the Pacific (2001)   (Reprinted from the 1913 ed.),  ISBN 0-89875-578-6.  
*Hills, Rev. Dr. Richard L., James Watt, Vol 1, His time in Scotland, 1736-1774 (2002); Vol 2, The years of toil, 1775-1785; Vol 3 Triumph through adversity 1785-1819.  Landmark Publishing Ltd, ISBN 1-84306-045-0.
*Marsden, Ben. Watt's Perfect Engine Columbia University Press (New York, 2002) ISBN 0-231-13172-0.







* Archives of Soho at Birmingham Central Library.










Blaise_Pascal



Blaise Pascal ( ), (June 19 1623   August 19 1662) was a French mathematician, physicist, and religious philosopher. He was a child prodigy who was educated by his father. Pascal's earliest work was in the natural and applied sciences where he made important contributions to the construction of mechanical calculators, the study of fluids, and clarified the concepts of pressure and vacuum by generalizing the work of Evangelista Torricelli. Pascal also wrote in defense of the scientific method.

He was a mathematician of the first order. Pascal helped create two major new areas of research. He wrote a significant treatise on the subject of projective geometry at the age of sixteen and corresponded with Pierre de Fermat from 1654 and later on probability theory, strongly influencing the development of modern economics and social science.

Following a mystical experience in late 1654, he abandoned his scientific work and devoted himself to philosophy and theology. His two most famous works date from this period: the Lettres provinciales and the Pensées. Pascal suffered from ill health throughout his life and died two months after his 39th birthday.




Born in Clermont-Ferrand, in the Auvergne region of France, Blaise Pascal lost his mother, Antoinette Begon, at the age of three. His father, Étienne Pascal (1588–1651), was a local judge and member of the "noblesse de robe", who also had an interest in science and mathematics. Blaise Pascal was brother to Jacqueline Pascal the youngest sibling and Gilberte, the eldest.

In 1631, shortly after the death of his wife, Étienne Pascal moved with his children to Paris. Étienne, who never remarried, decided that he alone would educate his children, for they all showed extraordinary intellectual ability, particularly his son Blaise.  The young Pascal showed an amazing  aptitude for mathematics and science. At the age of eleven, he composed a short treatise on the sounds of vibrating bodies and Étienne responded by forbidding his son to further pursue mathematics until the age of fifteen so as not to harm his study of Latin and Greek. One day, however, Étienne found Blaise (now twelve) writing an independent proof that the sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles with a piece of coal on a wall. From then on, the boy was allowed to study Euclid; perhaps more importantly, he was allowed to sit in as a silent on-looker at the gatherings of some of the greatest mathematicians and scientists in Europe—such as Roberval, Desargues, Mydorge, Gassendi, and Descartes—in the monastic cell of Père Mersenne. 
An early Pascaline on display at the Musée des Arts et Métiers in the Louvre Museum, Paris.

Particularly of interest to Pascal was a work of Desargues on conic sections. Following Desargues's thinking, the sixteen-year-old Pascal produced, as a means of proof, a short treatise on what was called the "Mystic Hexagram" (conic sections), Essai pour les coniques ("Essay on Conics").  And sent it - his first serious work of mathematics—to Père Mersenne in Paris; it is known still today as  Pascal's theorem. 
Briefly, it can be explained thus:

* 2. Take a simple plane and slice the cone in two going across.
* 3. If the plane is straight across, the section cut out will be a circle.
* 4. If the plane is at an angle, the section cut out will be an ellipse. This is the more general case, because ellipses can be squat or long, thin or nearly round: Because Pascal wanted to prove a general theorem, he took the case of an ellipse.
* 5. Draw a six sided figure inside the ellipse. The figure does not have to be regular, and may intersect itself.
* 6. Now take a pencil and make big dots on the vertices of the hexagram, and draw lines between the vertices. Then, extend the lines out to where they cross.

Pascal's work was so precocious that Descartes, when shown the manuscript, refused to believe that the composition was not by the elder Pascal. 
When assured by Mersenne that it was, indeed, the product of the son not the father, Descartes dismissed it with a sniff: "I do not find it strange that he has offered demonstrations about conics more appropriate than those of the ancients," adding, "but other matters related to this subject can be proposed that would scarcely occur to a sixteen-year-old child." The Story of Civilization: Volume 8, "The Age of Louis XIV" by Will & Ariel Durant; chapter II, subsection 4.1 (pg. 56)

In France at that time offices and positions could be—and were—bought and sold. In 1631 Étienne sold his position as second president of the Cour des Aides for 65,665 livres. Connor, James A., Pascal's Wager(HarperCollins, NY,  2006)p.42  The money was invested in a government bond which provided if not a lavish then certainly a comfortable income which allowed the Pascal family to move to, and enjoy, Paris. But in 1638 Richelieu desperate for money to carry on the Thirty Year War found it by defaulting on the government's bonds. Suddenly Étienne Pascal's worth had dropped from nearly 66,000 livres to less than 7,300.

Like so many others, Étienne's opposition to the fiscal policies of Cardinal Richelieu eventually forced him to flee Paris, leaving his three children in the care of his neighbor Madame Sainctot, a great beauty with an infamous past who kept one of the most glittering and intellectual salons in all France. It was only when Jacqueline performed well in a children's play with Richelieu in attendance that Étienne was pardoned. In time Étienne was back in good graces with the cardinal, and in 1639 had been appointed the king's commissioner of taxes in the city of Rouen — a city whose tax records, thanks to uprisings, were in utter chaos.

In 1642, in an effort to ease his father's endless, exhausting calculations, and recalculations, of taxes owed and paid, Pascal, not yet nineteen,  constructed a mechanical calculator capable of addition and subtraction, called Pascal's calculator or the Pascaline.  The Musée des Arts et Métiers in Paris and the Zwinger museum in Dresden, Germany, exhibit one of his original mechanical calculators. Though these machines are early forerunners to computer engineering, the calculator failed to be a great commercial success. Because it was extraordinarily expensive the Pascaline became little more than a toy, and status symbol, for the very rich both in France and throughout Europe; however Pascal continued to make improvements to his design through the next decade and built fifty machines in total.



Portrait of Blaise Pascal

In addition to the childhood marvels previously mentioned, Pascal continued to influence mathematics throughout his life.  In 1653, Pascal wrote his Traité du triangle arithmétique ("Treatise on the Arithmetical Triangle") in which he described a convenient tabular presentation for binomial coefficients, now called Pascal's triangle. In 1654, prompted by a friend interested in gambling problems, he corresponded with Fermat on the subject, and from that collaboration was born the mathematical theory of probabilities. The friend was the Chevalier de Méré, and the specific problem was that of two players who want to finish a game early and, given the current circumstances of the game, want to divide the stakes fairly, based on the chance each has of winning the game from that point.  From this discussion, the notion of expected value was introduced. Pascal later (in the Pensées) used a probabilistic argument, Pascal's Wager, to justify belief in God and a virtuous life. The work done by Fermat and Pascal into the calculus of probabilities laid important groundwork for Leibniz's formulation of the infinitesimal calculus.   The Mathematical Leibniz

After a religious experience in 1654, Pascal mostly gave up work in mathematics. However, after a sleepless night in 1658, he anonymously offered a prize for the quadrature of a cycloid.  Solutions were offered by Wallis, Huygens, Wren, and others; Pascal, under a pseudonym, published his own solution.  Controversy and heated argument followed after Pascal announced himself the winner.



Pascal's major contribution to the philosophy of mathematics came with his De l'Esprit géométrique ("On the Geometrical Spirit"), originally written as a preface to a geometry textbook for one of the famous "Little Schools of Port-Royal" (Les Petites-Ecoles de Port-Royal). The work was unpublished until over a century after his death. Here, Pascal looked into the issue of discovering truths, arguing that the ideal of such a method would be to found all propositions on already established truths. At the same time, however, he claimed this was impossible because such established truths would require other truths to back them up—first principles, therefore, cannot be reached. Based on this, Pascal argued that the procedure used in geometry was as perfect as possible, with certain principles assumed and other propositions developed from them. Nevertheless, there was no way to know the assumed principles to be true.

Pascal also used De l'Esprit géométrique to develop a theory of definition. He distinguished between definitions which are conventional labels defined by the writer and definitions which are within the language and understood by everyone because they naturally designate their referent. The second type would be characteristic of the philosophy of essentialism. Pascal claimed that only definitions of the first type were important to science and mathematics, arguing that those fields should adopt the philosophy of formalism as formulated by Descartes.

In De l'Art de persuader ("On the Art of Persuasion"), Pascal looked deeper into geometry's axiomatic method, specifically the question of how people come to be convinced of the axioms upon which later conclusions are based. Pascal agreed with Montaigne that achieving certainty in these axioms and conclusions through human methods is impossible. He asserted that these principles can only be grasped through intuition, and that this fact underscored the necessity for submission to God in searching out truths.



Pascal's work in the fields of the study of hydrodynamics and hydrostatics centered on the principles of hydraulic fluids. His inventions include the hydraulic press (using hydraulic pressure to multiply force) and the syringe. By 1646, Pascal had learned of Evangelista Torricelli's experimentation with barometers. Having replicated an experiment which involved placing a tube filled with mercury upside down in a bowl of mercury, Pascal questioned what force kept some mercury in the tube and what filled the space above the mercury in the tube. At the time, most scientists contended that, rather than a vacuum, some invisible matter was present. This was based on the Aristotelian notion that creation was a thing of substance, whether visible or invisible; and this substance was forever in motion. Furthermore, "Everything that is in motion must be moved by something," Aristotle declared. Aristotle,Physics,VII,1.  Ergo, to the Aristotelian trained scientists of Pascal's time, a vacuum was an impossibility. How so? As proof it was pointed out:
* Light passed through the so-called "vacuum" in the glass tube.
* Aristotle wrote how everything moved, and must be moved by something.
* Therefore, since there had to be an invisible "something" to move the light through the glass tube, there was no vacuum in the tube. Not in the glass tube or anywhere else. Vacuums—the absence of any and everything—were simply an impossibility.

Following more experimentation in this vein, in 1647 Pascal produced Experiences nouvelles touchant le vide ("New Experiments with the Vacuum"), which detailed basic rules describing to what degree various liquids could be supported by air pressure. It also provided reasons why it was indeed a vacuum above the column of liquid in a barometer tube.

On September 19, 1648, after many months of Pascal's friendly but insistent prodding, Florin Périer, husband of Pascal's elder sister Gilberte, was finally to carry out the fact finding mission vital to Pascal's theory. The account, written by Périer, reads:

"The weather was chancy last Saturday...[but] around five o'clock that morning...the Puy-de-Dôme was visible...so I decided to give it a try. Several important people of the city of Clermont has asked me to let them know when I made the ascent...I was delighted to have them with me in this great work...

"...at eight o'clock we met in the gardens of the Minim Fathers, which has the lowest elevation in town....First I poured sixteen pounds of quicksilver...in to a vessel...then took several glass tubes..each four feet long and hermetically sealed at one end and opened at the other...then placed them in the vessel [of quicksilver]...I found the quick silver stood at 26" and 3½ lines above the quicksilver in the vessel...I repeated the experiment two more times while standing in the same spot...[they] produced the same result each time...

"I attached one of the tubes to the vessel and marked the height of the quicksilver and...asked Father Chastin, one of the Minim Brothers...to watch if any changes should occur through the day...Taking the other tube and a portion of the quick silver...I walked to the top of Puy-de-Dôme, about 500 fathoms higher than the monastery, where upon experiment...found that the quicksilver reached a height of only 23" and 2 lines...I repeated the experiment five times with care...each at different points on the summit...found the same height of quicksilver...in each case..." Périer to Pascal, September 1647,Œuves completes de Pascal, 2:682.

Pascal replicated the experiment in Paris by carrying a barometer up to the top of the bell tower at the church of Saint-Jacques-de-la-Boucherie, a height of about fifty meters. The mercury dropped two lines. These, and other lesser experiments carried out by Pascal, were hailed throughout Europe as establishing the principle and value of the barometer.

In the face of criticism that some invisible matter must exist in Pascal's empty space, Pascal, in his reply to Estienne Noel, gave one of the seventeenth century's major statements on the scientific method: "In order to show that a hypothesis is evident, it does not suffice that all the phenomena follow from it; instead, if it leads to something contrary to a single one of the phenomena, that suffices to establish its falsity." His insistence on the existence of the vacuum also led to conflict with a number of other prominent scientists, including Descartes.







Pascal studying the cycloid, by Augustin Pajou, 1785, Louvre

Biographically, two basic influences led him to his conversion: sickness and Jansenism.  From as early as his eighteenth year, Pascal suffered from a nervous ailment that left him hardly a day without pain.  In 1647, a paralytic attack so disabled him that he could not move without crutches.  His head ached, his bowels burned, his legs and feet were continually cold, and required wearisome aids to circulate the blood; he wore stockings steeped in brandy to warm his feet.  Partly to get better medical treatment, he moved to Paris with his sister Jacqueline.  His health improved, but his nervous system had been permanently damaged.  Henceforth, he was subject to deepening hypochondria, which affected his character and his philosophy.  He became irritable, subject to fits of proud and imperious anger, and seldom smiled. Sainte-Beuve, Port-Royal, I, 89.

In the winter of 1646, Pascal's 58 year-old father broke his hip when he slipped and fell on an icy street of Rouen; given the man's age and the state of medicine in the 17th century, a broken hip could be very serious, perhaps even fatal, condition. Fortunately at the time Rouen was home to two of the finest doctors in France: Monsieur Doctor Deslandes, and Monsieur Doctor de La Bouteillerie. The elder Pascal "would not let anyone other than these men attend him...It was a good choice, for the old man survived and was able to walk again..." Connor, James A. Pascal's Wager (HarperCollins, 2006)p.70  But treatment and rehabilitation took three months, during which time La Bouteillerie and Deslandes were live-in guests at the Pascal household.

Both men were followers of Jean Guillebert, proponent of a splinter group of the main body of Catholic teaching known as Jansenius. This belief, which, though still fairly small, was making surprising headroads into French catholics, espoused a style of belief of rigorous Augustinism. Blaise spoke with the doctor frequently, and upon his successful treatment of Étienne, borrowed works by Jansenist authors through him.  In this period, Pascal experienced a sort of "first conversion" and began in the course of the following year to write on theological subjects.

Pascal fell away from this initial religious engagement and experienced a few years of what he called   a "worldly period" (1648–54).  His father died in 1651, and Pascal gained control over both his inheritance as well as his sister Jacqueline who announced that she intended to become a postulant in the Jansenist convent of Port-Royal by the first of the year. Pascal was deeply affected and very sad, not because of her choice, but because due to his life-long poor health he too needed her.

"Suddenly there was war in the Pascal household. Blaise pleaded with Jacqueline not to leave, but she was adamant. He commanded her to stay, but that didn't work, either.At the heart of this was...Blaise's fear of abandonment...if Jacqueline entered Port-Royal, she would have to leave her inheritance behind...[but] nothing would change her mind." Ibid. #4 p.122

By the end of October 1651 a truce had been reached between brother and sister: in return for a respectable annual stipend, Jacqueline signed over inheritance to her brother. (Their eldest sister Gilberte had already been given her inheritance in the form of a handsome dowry.) On 04 January, Jacqueline left for Port-Royal. On that day, according to Gilberte, "He retired very sadly to his rooms without seeing Jacqueline, who was waiting in the little parlor..." Jacqueline Pascal, "Memoir" p. 87 
On 05 June, 1653, after what must have seemed like endless badgering on the part of Jacqueline,
Pascal formally signed over the whole of his sister's inheritance to Port-Royal, which, by this time "had begun to smell like a cult." Ibid.#4 p.124  With two-thirds of his father's estate now gone, the 29 year-old Pascal was now consigned to genteel poverty. Jacqueline vowed a life of poverty. Pascal teetered on the brink of living one.

But Time is the best physician. For an exciting while Pascal pursued the life of a foot-loose bachelor, even going so far as giving merry chase while in Auvergne to a lady of beauty and learning, whom he referred to as the "Sappho of the countryside." Pascal, Pensées, Havet ed. Introd., p. civ.   Around this time, Pascal wrote Discours sur les passions de l'amour ("Conversation about the Passions of Love"), and apparently he contemplated marriage   which he was later to describe as "the lowest of the conditions of life permitted to a Christian." Mesnard, Pascal, 57. 
Jacqueline reproached him for his frivolity and prayed for his reform.  During visits to his sister at Port-Royal in 1654, he displayed contempt for affairs of the world but was not drawn to God. Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 52.



On November 23 1654, Pascal is said to have been involved in an accident at the Neuilly-sur-Seine bridge where the horses plunged over the parapet and the carriage nearly followed them.  Fortunately, the reins broke and the coach hung halfway over the edge.  Pascal and his friends emerged unscathed, but the sensitive philosopher, terrified by the nearness of death, fainted away and remained unconscious for some time.  Upon recovering fifteen days later, between 10:30 and 12:30 at night, Pascal had an intense religious vision and immediately recorded the experience in a brief note to himself which began: "Fire. God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, not of the philosophers and the scholars…" and concluded by quoting Psalm 119:16: "I will not forget thy word. Amen."  He seems to have carefully sewn this document into his coat and always transferred it when he changed clothes; a servant discovered it only by chance after his death. Oeuvres complètes, 618.  This piece is now known as the Memorial. The story of the carriage accident as having led to the experience described in the Memorial is disputed by some scholars  MathPages, .

His belief and religious commitment revitalized, Pascal visited the older of two convents at Port-Royal for a two-week retreat in January 1655. For the next four years, he regularly travelled between Port-Royal and Paris.  It was at this point immediately after his conversion when he began writing his first major literary work on religion, the Provincial Letters.




Beginning in 1656, Pascal published his memorable attack on casuistry, a popular ethical method used by Catholic thinkers in the early modern period (especially the Jesuits, and in particular Antonio Escobar). Pascal denounced casuistry as the mere use of complex reasoning to justify moral laxity and all sorts of sins. His method of framing his arguments was clever: the Provincial Letters pretended to be the report of a Parisian to a friend in the provinces on the moral and theological issues then exciting the intellectual and religious circles in the capital. Pascal, combining the fervor of a convert with the wit and polish of a man of the world, reached a new level of style in French prose.  The 18-letter series was published between 1656 and 1657 under the pseudonym Louis de Montalte and incensed Louis XIV. The king ordered that the book be shredded and burnt in 1660. In 1661, in the midsts of the formulary controversy, the Jansenist school at Port-Royal was condemned and closed down; those involved with the school had to sign a 1656 papal bull condemning the teachings of Jansen as heretical.  The final letter from Pascal, in 1657, had defied the Pope himself, provoking Alexander VII to condemn the letters.  But that didn't stop all of educated France from reading them.  Even Pope Alexander, while publicly opposing them, nonetheless was persuaded by Pascal's arguments.  He condemned "laxism" in the church and ordered a revision of casuistical texts just a few years later (1665–66).

Aside from their religious influence, the Provincial Letters were popular as a literary work. Pascal's use of humor, mockery, and vicious satire in his arguments made the letters ripe for public consumption, and influenced the prose of later French writers like Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.



When Pascal was back in Paris just after overseeing the publication of the last Letter, his religion was reinforced by the close association to an apparent miracle in the chapel of the Port-Royal nunnery.  His 10-year-old niece, Marguerite Périer, was suffering from a painful fistula lacrymalis that exuded noisome pus through her eyes and nose—an affliction the doctors pronounced hopeless.  Then, on March 24, 1657, a believer presented to Port-Royal what he and others claimed to be a thorn from the crown that had tortured Christ.  The nuns, in solemn ceremony and singing psalms, placed the thorn on their altar.  Each in turn kissed the relic, and one of them, seeing Marguerite among the worshipers, took the thorn and with it touched the girl's sore.  That evening, we are told, Marguerite expressed surprise that her eye no longer pained her; her mother was astonished to find no sign of the fistula; a physician, summoned, reported that the discharge and swelling had disappeared.  He, not the nuns, spread word of what he termed a miraculous cure.  Seven other physicians who had had previous knowledge of Marguerite's fistula signed a statement that in their judgment a miracle had taken place.  The diocesan officials investigated, came to the same conclusion, and authorized a Te Deum Mass in Port-Royal.  Crowds of believers came to see and kiss the thorn; all of Catholic Paris acclaimed a miracle.  Later, both Jansenists and Catholics used this well-documented miracle to their defense.  In 1728, Pope Benedict XIII referred to the case as proving that the age of miracles had not passed.

Pascal made himself an armorial emblem of an eye surrounded by a crown of thorns, with the inscription Scio cui credidi—"I know whom I have believed." Sainte-Beuve, Port-Royal, III, 173f.; Beard, Charles, Port-Royal, I 84.   His beliefs renewed, he set his mind to write his final, unfinished testament, the Pensées.




Unfortunately, Pascal could not finish his most influential theological work, referred posthumously as the Pensées ("Thoughts"), before his death.  It was to have been a sustained and coherent examination of and defense of the Christian faith, with the original title Apologie de la religion Chrétienne ("Defense of the Christian Religion").  What was found upon sifting through his personal items after his death were numerous scraps of paper with isolated thoughts, grouped in a tentative, but telling, order.  The first version of the detached notes appeared in print as a book in 1670 titled Pensées de M. Pascal sur la religion, et sur quelques autres sujets ("Thoughts of M. Pascal on religion, and on other subjects") and soon thereafter became a classic. One of the Apology's main strategy was to use the contradictory philosophies of skepticism and stoicism, personnalized by Montaigne on one hand, and Epictetus on the other, in order to bring the unbeliever to such despair and confusion that he would embrace God. This strategy was deemed quite hazardous by Pierre Nicole, Antoine Arnauld and other friends and scholars of Port-Royal, who were concerned that these fragmentary "thoughts" might lead to skepticism rather than to piety. Henceforth, they concealed the skeptical pieces and modified some of the rest, lest King or Church should take offense Pascal, Pensées, Introduction, p. xxviii; Mesnard, Pascal, 137–138.  for at that time the persecution of Port-Royal had ceased, and the editors were not interested in a renewal of controversy.  Not until the nineteenth century were the Pensées published in their full and authentic text.

Pascal's Pensées is widely considered to be a masterpiece, and a landmark in French prose.  When commenting on one particular section (Thought #72), Sainte-Beuve praised it as the finest pages in the French language. Sainte-Beuve, Seventeenth Century, 174.   Will Durant, in his 11-volume, comprehensive The Story of Civilization series, hailed it as "the most eloquent book in French prose." The Story of Civilization: Volume 8, "The Age of Louis XIV" by Will & Ariel Durant, chapter II, Subsection 4.4 (pg. 66)   In Pensées, Pascal surveys several philosophical paradoxes: infinity and nothing, faith and reason, soul and matter, death and life, meaning and vanity—seemingly arriving at no definitive conclusions besides humility, ignorance, and grace.  Rolling these into one he develops Pascal's Wager.



Pascal's epitaph in Saint-Étienne-du-Mont, where he was buried

T. S. Eliot described him during this phase of his life as "a man of the world among ascetics, and an ascetic among men of the world." Pascal's ascetic lifestyle derived from a belief that it was natural and necessary for man to suffer. In 1659, Pascal, whose health had never been good, fell seriously ill. During his last years, he frequently tried to reject the ministrations of his doctors, saying, "Sickness is the natural state of Christians." Muir, 104.

Louis XIV suppressed the Jansenist movement at Port-Royal in 1661. In response, Pascal wrote one of his final works, Écrit sur la signature du formulaire ("Writ on the Signing of the Form"), exhorting the Jansenists not to give in. Later that year, his sister Jacqueline died, which convinced Pascal to cease his polemics on Jansenism. Pascal's last major achievement, returning to his mechanical genius, was inaugurating perhaps the first bus line, moving passengers within Paris in a carriage with many seats.

In 1662, Pascal's illness became more violent. Aware that his health was fading quickly, he sought a move to the hospital for incurable diseases, but his doctors declared that he was too unstable to be carried. In Paris on August 18, 1662, Pascal went into convulsions and received extreme unction. He died the next morning, his last words being "May God never abandon me," and was buried in the cemetery of Saint-Étienne-du-Mont. Muir, 104.

An autopsy performed after his death revealed grave problems with his stomach and other organs of his abdomen, along with damage to his brain. Despite the autopsy, the cause of his continual poor health was never precisely determined, though speculation focuses on tuberculosis, stomach cancer, or a combination of the two. Muir, 103.  The headaches which afflicted Pascal are generally attributed to his brain lesion.



In honor of his scientific contributions, the name Pascal has been given to the SI unit of pressure, to a programming language, and Pascal's law (an important principle of hydrostatics), and as mentioned above, Pascal's triangle and Pascal's wager still bear his name.

Pascal's development of probability theory was his most influential contribution to mathematics. Originally applied to gambling, today it is extremely important in economics, especially in actuarial science. John Ross writes, "Probability theory and the discoveries following it changed the way we regard uncertainty, risk, decision-making, and an individual's and society's ability to influence the course of future events."  However, it should be noted that Pascal and Fermat, though doing important early work in probability theory, did not develop the field very far. Christiaan Huygens, learning of the subject from the correspondence of Pascal and Fermat, wrote the first book on the subject. Later figures who continued the development of the theory include Abraham de Moivre and Pierre-Simon Laplace.

In literature, Pascal is regarded as one of the most important authors of the French Classical Period and is read today as one of the greatest masters of French prose. His use of satire and wit influenced later polemicists. The content of his literary work is best remembered for its strong opposition to the rationalism of René Descartes and simultaneous assertion that the main countervailing philosophy, empiricism, was also insufficient for determining major truths.



In France, a prestigious annual competition is held for outstanding international scientists to conduct their research in the Ile de France region named after Pascal (the Blaise Pascal Chair).

In Canada, there is an annual math contest named in his honour. The Pascal Contest is open to any student in Canada who is fourteen years or under and is in grade nine or lower.

A discussion of Pascal figures prominently in the movie My Night At Maud's by the French director Éric Rohmer.

Roberto Rossellini directed a filmed biopic (entitled Blaise Pascal) which originally aired on Italian television in 1971. Pierre Arditi starred as Pascal.






* Davidson, Hugh M. Blaise Pascal. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1983.
* Farrell, John. "Pascal and Power". Chapter seven of Paranoia and Modernity: Cervantes to Rousseau (Cornell UP, 2006).
* Miel, Jan. Pascal and Theology. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1969. 
* Pascal, Blaise. Oeuvres complètes. Paris: Seuil, 1960.







*  Pascal's Memorial in orig. French/Latin and modern English, trans. Elizabeth T. Knuth.
* Etext of a number of Pascal's  minor works (English translation) including, among others, De l'Esprit géométrique and De l'Art de persuader.
*  "Pascal's Legacy", an article by John Ross on the influence of Pascal's probability theory.
* Blaise Pascal College No.70: A Rosicrucian (SRIA) college named after Pascal.

Charles-Augustin_de_Coulomb



Charles Augustin de Coulomb (born June 14, 1736, Angoulême, France - died August 23, 1806, Paris, France) was a French physicist. He is best known for developing Coulomb's law: the definition of the electrostatic force of attraction and repulsion. The SI unit of charge, the coulomb, was named after him.



Coulomb was born in Angoulême, France, to a well to do family. His father, Henri Coulomb, was inspector of the Royal Fields in Montpellier. His mother, Catherine Bajet, came from a wealthy family in the wool trade. When Coulomb was a boy the family moved to Paris, and there Coulomb studied at the prestigious Collège des Quatre-Nations. The courses of mathematics there under Pierre Charles Monnier made him decide to pursue mathematics and the similar subjects as a career. From 1757 to 1759 he joined his father's family in Montpellier and took part in the work of the academy of the city, directed by the mathematician Augustin Danyzy. With his father's approval, Coulomb returned to Paris in 1759  to  successfully study for the entrance examination at the military school at Mézières.

At his exit from the school in 1761, he initially took part in the survey for the British coastal charts, then was sent on mission to Martinique in 1764  to take part in the construction of the Fort Bourbon under the orders of the lieutenant-colonel of Rochemore, as the French colony was insulated in the middle of the English and Spanish possessions following the Seven Years' War. Coulomb spent eight years directing the work, contracting tropical fever. He carried out several experiments on the resistance of masonries and the behaviour of the walls of escarpe (supportings), which were inspired by the ideas of Pieter van Musschenbroek on friction.

Upon his return, with the rank of Captain, he was employed at La Rochelle, the Isle of Aix and Cherbourg. He discovered an inverse relationship of the force between electric charges and the square of its distance, later named after him as Coulomb's law.

In 1781, he was stationed permanently at Paris. On the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789, he resigned his appointment as intendant des eaux et fontaines, and retired to a small estate which he possessed at Blois. He was recalled to Paris for a time in order to take part in the new determination of weights and measures, which had been decreed by the Revolutionary government. He was one of the first members of the National Institute; he was appointed inspector of public instruction in 1802 . But his health was already very feeble, and four years later he died in Paris, France.

Coulomb leaves a legacy as a hero in the field of geotechnical engineering for his contribution to retaining wall design.



Coulomb is distinguished in the history of mechanics and of electricity and magnetism. In 1779  he published an important investigation of the laws of friction, Théorie des machines simples, en ayant égard au frottement de leurs parties et à la roideur des cordages (Theory of simple machines with regard for the friction of their parts and the tension of the ropes), which was followed twenty years later by a memoir on viscosity.

In 1784  his Recherches théoriques et expérimentales sur la force de torsion et sur l'élasticité des fils de metal  Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, 229-269, 1784  (Theoretical research and experimentation on torsion and the elasticity of metal wire) appeared. This memoir contained a description of different forms of his torsion balance. He used the instrument with great success for the experimental investigation of the distribution of charge on surfaces, of the laws of electrical and magnetic force, and of the mathematical theory of which he may also be regarded as the founder.

Coulomb's torsion balance
In 1785  Coulomb presented his three reports on Electricity and Magnetism:

- Premier Mémoire sur l’Electricité et le Magnétisme  Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, 569-577, 1785 . In this publication Coulomb describes “How to construct and use an electric balance (torsion balance) based on the property of the metal wires of having a reaction torsion force proportional to the torsion angle”.  Coulomb also experimentally determined the law that explains how “two bodies electrified of the same kind of Electricity exert on each other”.

- Sécond Mémoire sur l’Electricité et le Magnétisme  Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, 578-611, 1785 . In this publication Coulomb carries out the “determination according to which laws both the Magnetic and the Electric fluids act, either by repulsion or by attraction”.

- Troisième Mémoire sur l’Electricité et le Magnétisme  Histoire de l’Académie Royale des Sciences, 612-638, 1785 . “On the quantity of Electricity that an isolated body loses in a certain time period , either by contact with less humid air, or in the supports more or less idio-electric”.

Four subsequent reports were published in the following years:

- Quatrième Mémoire  "Where two principal properties of the electric fluid are demonstrated: first, that this fluid does not expand into any object according to a chemical affinity, or by an elective attraction, but that it divides itself between different objects brought into contact; second, that in conducting objects, the fluid, having achieved a state of stability, expands on the surface of the body and does not penetrate into the interior." (1786)

- Cinquième Mémoire  "On the manner in which the electric fluid divides itself between conducting objects brought into contact, and the distribution of this fluid on the different parts of the surface of this object." (1787)

- Sixième Mémoire "Continuation of research into the distribution of the electric fluid between several conductors. Determination of electric density at different points on the surface of these bodies." (1788)

- Septième Mémoire. "On magnetism" (1789)

Coulomb explained the laws of attraction and repulsion between electric charges and magnetic poles, although he did not find any relationship between the two phenomena.  He thought that the attraction and repulsion were due to different kinds of fluids.




*  French National Library The Mémoires of Coulomb available in pdf format.

----

Piano



Baby Grand Piano
The piano is a musical instrument played by means of a keyboard that produces sound by striking steel strings with felt covered hammers. The hammers immediately rebound, allowing the strings to continue vibrating at their resonant frequency. " Hammer Time" by John Kiehl, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.  These vibrations are transmitted through a bridge to a soundboard that couples the acoustic energy to the air so that it can be heard as sound.

The piano is widely used in Western music for solo performance, ensemble use, chamber music, and accompaniment. It is also very popular as an aid to composing and rehearsal. Although not portable and often expensive, the piano's versatility and ubiquity  have made it one of the most familiar musical instruments. It is sometimes classified as both a percussion and a stringed instrument. According to the Hornbostel-Sachs method of music classification, it is grouped with Chordophones.

The word piano is a shortened form of the word pianoforte, which is seldom used except in formal language and derived from the original Italian name for the instrument, clavicembalo [or gravicembalo] col piano e forte (literally harpsichord with soft and loud). This refers to the instrument's responsiveness to keyboard touch, which allows the pianist to produce notes at different dynamic levels by controlling the speed with which the hammers hit the strings.




Early piano replica by the modern builder Paul McNulty, after Walter & Sohn, 1805

The piano was originally founded on earlier technological innovations. The first string instruments with struck strings were the hammered dulcimers originating from the Persian traditional musical instrument santur. David R. Peterson (1994), "Acoustics of the hammered dulcimer, its history, and recent developments", Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 95 (5), p. 3002.  During the Middle Ages, there were several attempts at creating stringed keyboard instruments with struck strings, Pollens, 1995. chp. 1  the earliest being the hurdy gurdy which has uncertain origins.    By the 17th century, the mechanisms of keyboard instruments such as the clavichord and the harpsichord were well known. In a clavichord the strings are struck by tangents, while in a harpsichord they are plucked by quills. Centuries of work on the mechanism of the harpsichord in particular had shown the most effective ways to construct the case, soundboard, bridge, and keyboard.

Grand piano by Louis Bas of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon, France, 1781. Earliest French grand piano known to survive; includes an inverted wrestplank and action derived from the work of Bartolomeo Cristofiori (ca. 1700) with ornately decorated soundboard.
The invention of the modern piano is credited to Bartolomeo Cristofori of Padua, Italy, who was employed by Prince Ferdinand de Medici as the Keeper of the Instruments. He was an expert harpsichord maker and was well acquainted with the previous body of knowledge on stringed keyboard instruments. It is not known exactly when Cristofori first built a piano.  An inventory made by his employers, the Medici family, indicates the existence of a piano by the year 1700; another document of doubtful authenticity indicates a date of 1698.  The three Cristofori pianos that survive today date from the 1720s.

Cristofori's great success was in solving, without any prior example, the fundamental mechanical problem of piano design: the hammer must strike the string, but not remain in contact with it (as a tangent remains in contact with a clavichord string) because this would damp the sound. Moreover, the hammer must return to its rest position without bouncing violently, and it must be possible to repeat a note rapidly. Cristofori's piano action served as a model for the many different approaches to piano actions that followed. While Cristofori's early instruments were made with thin strings and were much quieter than the modern piano, compared to the clavichord (the only previous keyboard instrument capable of minutely controlled dynamic nuance through the keyboard) they were considerably louder and had more sustaining power.

Cristofori's new instrument remained relatively unknown until an Italian writer, Scipione Maffei, wrote an enthusiastic article about it (1711), including a diagram of the mechanism. This article was widely distributed, and most of the next generation of piano builders started their work because of reading it. One of these builders was Gottfried Silbermann, better known as an organ builder. Silbermann's pianos were virtually direct copies of Cristofori's, with one important addition: Silbermann invented the forerunner of the modern damper pedal, which lifts all the dampers from the strings at once.

Silbermann showed Johann Sebastian Bach one of his early instruments in the 1730s, but Bach did not like it at that time, claiming that the higher notes were too soft to allow a full dynamic range. Although this earned him some animosity from Silbermann, the criticism was apparently heeded. Bach did approve of a later instrument he saw in 1747, and even served as an agent in selling Silbermann's pianos.

Piano making flourished during the late 18th century in the Viennese school, which included Johann Andreas Stein (who worked in Augsburg, Germany) and the Viennese makers Nannette Streicher (daughter of Johann Andreas Stein) and Anton Walter. Viennese-style pianos were built with wood frames, two strings per note, and had leather-covered hammers. Some of these Viennese pianos had the opposite coloring of modern-day pianos; the natural keys were black and the accidental keys white.     It was for such instruments that Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart composed his concertos and sonatas, and replicas of them are built today for use in authentic-instrument performance of his music. The pianos of Mozart's day had a softer, clearer tone than today's pianos or English pianos, with less sustaining power. The term fortepiano is nowadays often used to distinguish the 18th-century instrument from later pianos.




In the period lasting from about 1790 to 1860, the Mozart-era piano underwent tremendous changes that led to the modern form of the instrument. This revolution was in response to a consistent preference by composers and pianists for a more powerful, sustained piano sound, and made possible by the ongoing Industrial Revolution with technological resources such as high-quality steel, called piano wire, for strings, and precision casting for the production of iron frames. Over time, the tonal range of the piano was also increased from the five octaves of Mozart's day to the 7⅓ or more octaves found on modern pianos.
Broadwood square action
Early technological progress owed much to the English firm of Broadwood, who already had a reputation for the splendour and powerful tone of its harpsichords. Broadwood constructed instruments that were progressively larger, louder, and more robustly constructed. They sent pianos to both Joseph Haydn and Ludwig van Beethoven, and were the first firm to build pianos with a range of more than five octaves: five octaves and a fifth during the 1790s, six octaves by 1810 (Beethoven used the extra notes in his later works), and seven octaves by 1820. The Viennese makers similarly followed these trends, however the two schools used different piano actions: Broadwoods were more robust, Viennese instruments were more sensitive.

Erard square action
By the 1820s, the center of innovation had shifted to Paris, where the Pleyel firm manufactured pianos used by Frédéric Chopin and the Érard firm manufactured those used by Franz Liszt. In 1821, Sébastien Érard invented the double escapement action, which permitted a note to be repeated even if the key had not yet risen to its maximum vertical position. This facilitated rapid playing of repeated notes - and this musical device was pioneered by Liszt. When the invention became public, as revised by Henri Herz, the double escapement action gradually became standard in grand pianos, and is still incorporated into all grand pianos currently produced.

One of the major technical innovations that helped to create the sound of the modern piano was the use of a strong iron frame. Also called the "plate", the iron frame sits atop the soundboard, and serves as the primary bulwark against the force of string tension. The increased structural integrity of the iron frame allowed the use of thicker, tenser, and more numerous strings.  In a modern grand the total string tension can exceed 20 tons. The single piece cast iron frame was patented in 1825 in Boston by Alpheus Babcock, combining the metal hitch pin plate (1821, claimed by Broadwood on behalf of Samuel Hervé) and resisting bars (Thom and Allen, 1820, but also claimed by Broadwood and Érard). Babcock later worked for the Chickering & Mackays firm who patented the first full iron frame for grand pianos in 1843. Composite forged metal frames were preferred by many European makers until the American system was fully adopted by the early 20th century.

Other innovations for the mechanism included the use of felt hammer coverings instead of layered leather hammers. Felt hammers, which were first introduced by Henri Pape in 1826, were a more consistent material, permitting wider dynamic ranges as hammer weights and string tension increased. The sostenuto pedal (see below), invented in 1844 by Jean Louis Boisselot and improved by the Steinway firm in 1874, allowed a wider range of effects.

Other important technical innovations of this era included changes to the way the piano was strung, such as the use of a "choir" of three strings rather than two for all but the lower notes, and the use of different stringing methods. With the over strung scale, also called "cross-stringing", the strings are placed in a vertically overlapping slanted arrangement, with two heights of bridges on the soundboard instead of just one. This permits larger, but not necessarily longer, strings to fit within the case of the piano. Over stringing was invented by Jean-Henri Pape during the 1820s, and first patented for use in grand pianos in the United States by Henry Steinway Jr. in 1859.
Duplex scaling: Treble strings of a 182 cm. grand piano. From lower left to upper right: dampers, main sounding length of strings, treble bridge, duplex string length, duplex bridge (long bar perpendicular to strings), hitchpins. With duplexes or aliquot scales, which was patented in 1872 by Theodore Steinway, the different components of string vibrations are controlled by tuning their secondary parts in octave relationships with the sounding lengths. Similar systems developed by Blüthner (1872), as well as  Taskin (1788), and Collard (1821) used more distinctly ringing undamped vibrations to modify tone.

Some early pianos had shapes and designs that are no longer in use. The square piano had horizontal strings arranged diagonally across the rectangular case above the hammers and with the keyboard set in the long side. This design is attributed to Gottfried Silbermann or Christian Ernst Friderici on the continent, and Johannes Zumpe or Harman Vietor in England and it was improved by changes first introduced by Guillaume-Lebrecht Petzold in France and Alpheus Babcock in the United States. Square pianos were built in great numbers through the 1840s in Europe and the 1890s in America, and saw the most visible changes of any type of piano: the celebrated iron framed over strung squares manufactured by Steinway & Sons were more than two and a half times the size of Zumpe's wood framed instruments from a century before. Their overwhelming popularity was due to inexpensive construction and price, although their performance and tone were often limited by simple actions and closely spaced strings.

The mechanism in upright pianos is perpendicular to the keys.
The tall, vertically strung upright grand was arranged like a grand set on end, with the soundboard and bridges above the keys, and tuning pins below them. The term was later revived by many manufacturers for advertising purposes. Giraffe, pyramid and lyre pianos were arranged in a somewhat similar fashion in evocatively shaped cases.

The very tall cabinet piano was introduced about 1805 and was built through the 1840s. It had strings arranged vertically on a continuous frame with bridges extended nearly to the floor, behind the keyboard and very large sticker action. The short cottage upright or pianino with vertical stringing, made popular by Robert Wornum around 1815, was built into the 20th century. They are informally called birdcage pianos because of their prominent damper mechanism. Pianinos were distinguished from the oblique, or diagonally strung upright made popular in France by Roller & Blanchet during the late 1820s. The tiny spinet upright was manufactured from the mid-1930s until recent times. The low position of the hammers required the use of a "drop action" to preserve a reasonable keyboard height.

Modern upright and grand pianos attained their present forms by the end of the 19th century. Improvements have been made in manufacturing processes, and many individual details of the instrument continue to receive attention.




Much of the most widely admired piano repertoire, for example, that of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, was composed for a type of instrument that is rather different from the modern instruments on which this music is normally performed today. Even the music of the Romantics, including Liszt, Chopin, Robert Schumann, Felix Mendelssohn and Johannes Brahms, was written for pianos substantially different from ours.



A schematic depiction of the construction of a pianoforte.


Modern pianos come in two basic configurations (with subcategories): the grand piano and the upright piano.


Grand piano
In grand pianos, the frame and strings are horizontal, with the strings extending away from the keyboard. There are several sizes of grand piano. A rough generalization distinguishes the "concert grand" (between about   and   long) from the "parlor grand" or "boudoir grand" (about   to  ) and the smaller "baby grand".

All else being equal, longer pianos with longer strings have better sound and lower inharmonicity of the strings. Inharmonicity is the degree to which the frequencies of overtones (known as partials, partial tones, or harmonics) depart from whole multiples of the fundamental frequency. Pianos with shorter, thicker, and stiffer strings (e.g., baby grands) have more inharmonicity. The longer strings on a concert grand can vibrate more freely than the shorter, thicker strings on a baby grand, which means that a concert grand's strings will have truer overtones. This is partly because the strings will be tuned closer to equal temperament in relation to the standard pitch with less "stretching" in the piano tuning (See: Piano tuning). Full-size grands are usually used for public concerts, whereas smaller grands, introduced by Sohmer & Co. in 1884, are often chosen for domestic use where space and cost are considerations.



Upright piano

Upright pianos, also called vertical pianos, are more compact because the frame and strings are  vertical. It is considered harder to produce a sensitive piano action when the hammers move horizontally, as the vertical hammer return is dependent on springs which are prone to wear and tear. However, a well-regulated vertical piano will probably play more smoothly than a poorly regulated grand piano, and the very best upright pianos approach the level of some grand pianos of the same size in tone quality and responsiveness.

One noticeable advantage that the grand piano action has over the vertical action is that all grand pianos have a special repetition lever in the playing action that is absent in all verticals. This repetition lever, a separate one for every key, catches the hammer close to the strings as long as the keys are played repeatedly and fairly quickly. In this position, with the hammer resting on the lever, a pianist can play repeated notes, staccato, and trills with much more speed and control than is possible on a vertical piano.

Upright pianos with unusually tall frames and long strings are sometimes called "upright grand" pianos.

Some authors classify modern pianos according to their height and, to modifications of the action that are necessary to accomodate the height.
* Studio pianos are around 42 to 45 inches tall.  This is the shortest cabinet that can accomodate a 'full-sized' action located above the keyboard.
* Console pianos have a compact action (shorter hammers), and are a few inches shorter than studio models.
* The top of a Spinet model barely rises above the keyboard.  The action is located below, operated by vertical wires that are attached to the backs of the keys.
* Anything taller than a studio piano is called an upright.



Player piano
Toy pianos began to be manufactured in the 19th century. In 1863, Henri Fourneaux invented the player piano, which "plays itself" from a piano roll without the need for a pianist. The player piano is a piano that records a performance using rolls of paper with perforations, and then replays the performance using pneumatic devices. A modern equivalent for the player piano is the Yamaha Disklavier system, which uses solenoids and midi instead of pneumatics and rolls. Silent pianos, which allow a regular piano to be used converted to a digital instrument, are a recent innovation and are becoming more popular.

Irving Berlin played a special piano called the transposing piano, which was invented in 1801 by Edward Ryley. It had a lever under the keyboard used to alter the music to any key. One of Berlin's pianos is in the Smithsonian Museum. For much of his career, Berlin only knew how to play the black keys. But with his 'trick piano' he was no longer limited to the key of F-sharp.

A relatively recent development is the prepared piano, which is used in contemporary art music. A prepared piano is a standard grand piano which has had objects placed inside it before a performance in order to alter its sound, or which has had its mechanism changed in some way. The scores for music for prepared piano often instruct the pianist to insert pieces of rubber or small pieces of metal (screws or washers) in between the strings. These added items either mute the strings or create unusual vibrating sounds.

Since the 1980s, digital pianos have been available, which use digital sampling technology to reproduce the sound of each piano note. The best digital pianos are sophisticated, with features including working pedals, weighted keys, multiple voices, and MIDI interfaces. However, with such technology, it is difficult to duplicate one particular aspect of acoustic pianos, namely that when the damper pedal (see below) is depressed, the strings not struck vibrate sympathetically when other strings are struck, as well as the unique instrument-specific mathematical non-linearity of partials on any given unison. Since this sympathetic vibration is considered central to piano tone,  many digital pianos do not sound the same as the best acoustic pianos. Progress is being made in this area by including physical models of sympathetic vibration in the synthesis software.  Some higher end digital pianos, such as the Yamaha Clavinova series, or the KAWAI MP8 series, produced in the last few years incorporate string resonance technology to overcome this limitation.

With the advent of powerful desktop computers, highly realistic sampled digital grand pianos have become available as affordable software modules.  Some use multi-gigabyte piano sample sets with as many as 90 recordings, each lasting many seconds, for each of the 88 keys under different conditions, augmented by additional samples to emulate sympathetic resonance, key release, the drop of the dampers, and simulations of piano techniques like re-pedaling.




Keyboard
Almost every modern piano has 36 black keys and 52 white keys for a total of 88 keys (seven octaves plus a minor third, from A0 to C8). Many older pianos only have 85 keys (seven octaves from A0 to A7), while some manufacturers extend the range further in one or both directions.

Some Bösendorfer pianos extend the normal range downwards to F0, with one other model going as far as a bottom C0, making a full eight octave range. These extra keys are sometimes hidden under a small hinged lid that can be flipped down to cover the keys in order to avoid visual disorientation in a pianist unfamiliar with the extended keyboard. On others, the colours of the extra white keys are reversed (black instead of white).

The extra keys are added primarily for increased resonance from the associated strings; that is, they vibrate sympathetically with other strings whenever the damper pedal is depressed and thus give a fuller tone. Only a very small number of works composed for piano actually use these notes. More recently, the Stuart and Sons company has also manufactured extended-range pianos. On their instruments, the range is extended both down the bass to F0 and up the treble to F8 for a full eight octaves. The extra keys are the same as the other keys in appearance.

Small studio upright acoustical pianos with only 65 keys have been manufactured for use by roving pianists. Known as "gig" pianos and still containing a cast iron harp, these are comparatively lightweight and can be easily transported to and from engagements by only two men. As their harp is longer than that of a spinet or console piano, they have a stronger bass sound that to some pianists is well worth the trade-off in range that a reduced key-set offers.



Piano pedals from left to right: una corda, sostenuto, and damper.

Pianos have had pedals, or some close equivalent, since the earliest days. (In the 18th century, some pianos used levers pressed upward by the player's knee instead of pedals.) Most grand pianos have three pedals: soft pedal (una corda), sostenuto, and sustain pedal (from left to right, respectively). Most modern upright pianos have three pedals: soft pedal, practice pedal and sustain pedal, though older or cheaper models may lack the practice pedal.

The sustain pedal (or, damper pedal) is often simply called "the pedal", since it is the most frequently used. It is placed as the rightmost pedal in the group. It lifts the dampers from all keys, sustaining all played notes, and altering the overall tone.

The soft pedal or una corda pedal is placed leftmost in the row of pedals. In grand pianos, it shifts the entire action, including the keyboard, to the right, so that the hammers hit only one of the three strings for each note (hence the name una corda, or 'one string'). The effect is to soften the note as well as to change the tone. In uprights, this action is not possible, and so the pedal moves the hammers closer to the strings, allowing the hammers to hit the strings with less kinetic energy to produce a softer sound.

On grand pianos, the middle pedal is a sostenuto pedal. This pedal keeps raised any damper that was already raised at the moment the pedal is depressed. This makes it possible to sustain some notes (by depressing the sostenuto pedal before notes to be sustained are released) while the player's hands are free to play other notes. This can be useful for musical passages with pedal points and other otherwise tricky or impossible situations.

On many upright pianos, there is a middle pedal called the 'practice' or celeste pedal. This drops a piece of felt between the hammers and strings, greatly muting the sounds.

There are also non-standard variants. On vertical pianos, the middle pedal can be a bass sustain pedal: that is, when it is depressed, the dampers lift off the strings only in the bass section. This pedal would be used only when a pianist needs to sustain a single bass note or chord over many measures, while playing the melody in the treble section. On the largest Fazioli piano, there is a fourth pedal to the left of the principal three. This fourth pedal works in the same way as the soft pedal of an upright piano, moving the hammers closer to the strings.



An upright pedal piano
The rare transposing piano, of which Irving Berlin possessed an example, had a middle pedal that functioned as a clutch which disengages the keyboard from the mechanism, enabling the keyboard to be moved to the left or right with a lever. The entire action of the piano is thus shifted to allow the pianist to play music written in one key so that it sounds in a different key. The pedalier piano, or pedal piano, is a rare type of piano that includes a pedalboard, enabling bass register notes to be played with the feet, as is standard on the organ. There are two types of pedal piano: the pedal board may be an integral part of the instrument, using the same strings and mechanism as the manual keyboard, or, less frequently, it may consist of two independent pianos (each with its separate mechanics and strings) which are placed one above the other, a regular piano played by the hands and a bass-register piano played by the feet.



Many parts of a piano are made of materials selected for sturdiness. In quality pianos, the outer rim of the piano is made of a hardwood, normally maple or beech. According to  Harold A. Conklin, the purpose of a sturdy rim is so that "the vibrational energy will stay as much as possible in the soundboard instead of dissipating uselessly in the case parts, which are inefficient radiators of sound."

View from below of a 182-cm grand piano. In order of distance from viewer: softwood braces, tapered soundboard ribs, soundboard. The metal rod at lower right is a humidity control device.
The rim is normally made by laminating flexible strips of hardwood to the desired shape, a system that was developed by Theodore Steinway in 1880. The thick wooden braces at the bottom (grands) or back (uprights) of the piano are not as acoustically important as the rim, and are often made of a softwood, even in top-quality pianos, in order to save weight. The requirement of structural strength, fulfilled with stout hardwood and thick metal, makes a piano heavy; even a small upright can weigh 136 kg (300 lb), and the Steinway concert grand (Model D) weighs 480 kg (990 lb). The largest piano built, the Fazioli F308, weighs 691 kg (1520 lb).

The pinblock, which holds the tuning pins in place, is another area of the piano where toughness is important. It is made of hardwood, (often maple) and generally is laminated (built of multiple layers) for additional strength and gripping power. Piano strings (also called piano wire), which must endure years of extreme tension and hard blows, are made of high quality steel. They are manufactured to vary as little as possible in diameter, since all deviations from uniformity introduce tonal distortion. The bass strings of a piano are made of a steel core wrapped with copper wire, to increase their mass whilst retaining flexibility.

The plate, or metal frame, of a piano is usually made of cast iron. It is advantageous for the plate to be quite massive. Since the strings are attached to the plate at one end, any vibrations transmitted to the plate will result in loss of energy to the desired (efficient) channel of sound transmission, namely the bridge and the soundboard. Some manufacturers now use cast steel in their plates, for greater strength. The casting of the plate is a delicate art, since the dimensions are crucial and the iron shrinks by about one percent during cooling.

The inclusion in a piano of an extremely large piece of metal is potentially an aesthetic handicap, which piano makers overcome by polishing, painting and decorating the plate. Plates often include the manufacturer's ornamental medallion and can be strikingly attractive. In an effort to make pianos lighter, Alcoa worked with Winter and Company piano manufacturers to make pianos using an aluminum plate during the 1940s. The use of aluminum for piano plates, however, did not become widely accepted and was discontinued.

The numerous grand parts and upright parts of a piano action are generally hardwood (e.g. maple, beech. hornbeam). However, since World War II, plastics have become available. Early plastics were incorporated into some pianos in the late 1940s and 1950s, but proved disastrous because they crystallized and lost their strength after only a few decades of use. The Steinway firm once incorporated Teflon, a synthetic material developed by DuPont, for some grand action parts in place of cloth, but ultimately abandoned the experiment due to an inherent "clicking" which invariably developed over time. (Also Teflon is "humidity stable" whereas the wood adjacent to the Teflon will swell and shrink with humidity changes, causing problems.) More recently, the Kawai firm has built pianos with action parts made of more modern and effective plastics such as carbon fiber; these parts have held up better and have generally received the respect of piano technicians .
Ivorite and ebony keys on a modern Steinway & Sons concert grand piano.
The part of the piano where materials probably matter more than anywhere else is the soundboard. In quality pianos, this is made of solid spruce (that is, spruce boards glued together at their edges). Spruce is chosen for its high ratio of strength to weight. The best piano makers use close-grained, quarter-sawn, defect-free spruce, and make sure that it has been carefully dried over a long period of time before making it into soundboards. In cheap pianos, the soundboard is often made of plywood.

Piano keys are generally made of spruce or basswood, for lightness. Spruce is normally used in high-quality pianos. Traditionally, the black keys were made from ebony and the white keys were covered with strips of ivory, but since ivory-yielding species are now endangered and protected by treaty, plastics are now almost exclusively used. Also, ivory tends to chip more easily than plastic. Legal ivory can still be obtained in limited quantities. At one time, the Yamaha firm innovated a plastic called "Ivorine" or "Ivorite", since imitated by other makers, that mimics the look and feel of ivory.




A piano tuner
Pianos need regular tuning to keep them up to pitch, which is usually the internationally recognized standard concert pitch of A4 = 440 Hz. The hammers of pianos are voiced to compensate for gradual hardening, and other parts also need periodic regulation. Aged and worn pianos can be rebuilt or reconditioned. Often, by replacing a great number of their parts, they can be made to perform as well as new pianos. Older pianos are often more settled and produce a warmer tone.

Piano moving should be done by trained piano movers using adequate manpower and the correct equipment for any particular piano's size and weight.  Pianos are heavy yet delicate instruments. Over the years, professional piano movers have developed special techniques for transporting both grands and uprights which prevent damage to the case and to the piano's mechanics.




The piano at the social center in the 19th century (Moritz von Schwind, 1868). The man at the piano is Franz Schubert.
The piano is a crucial instrument in Western classical music, jazz, film, television, and most other complex western musical genres. Since a large number of composers are proficient pianists – and because the piano keyboard offers an easy means of complex melodic and harmonic interplay – the piano is often used as a tool for composition.

Pianos were, and still are, popular instruments for private household ownership.  Hence, pianos have gained a place in the popular consciousness, and are sometimes referred to by nicknames including: "the ivories", "the joanna", "the eighty-eight", and "the black(s) and white(s)", "the little joe(s)". Playing the piano is sometimes referred to as "tickling the ivories".




;General
* Innovations in the piano
* Jazz piano
* Piano acoustics
* Piano key frequencies (in equal temperament)
* Piano trio
* String piano

;Related lists
* List of films about pianists
* Lists of solo piano pieces
* List of piano makers
* List of piano brand names
* List of classical pianists (recorded)

;Related instruments
* Hammered dulcimer
* Harp
* Clavichord
* Harpsichord
* Organ and Pipe organ
* Electric piano
* Electronic piano




* The authoritative New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (available online by subscription), contains a wealth of information. Main article: "Pianoforte".
* The Encyclopædia Britannica (available online by subscription) also includes much information on the piano. In the 1988 edition, the primary article can be found in "Musical Instruments".
*  The Piano Book  by Larry Fine (4th ed. Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts: Brookside Press, 2001; ISBN 1-929145-01-2) gives the basics of how pianos work, and a thorough evaluative survey of current pianos and their manufacturers. It also includes advice on buying and owning pianos.
*Giraffes, black dragons, and other pianos: a technological history from Cristofori to the modern concert grand by Edwin M. Good (1982, second ed., 2001, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press) is a standard reference on the history of the piano.
*The Early Pianoforte by Stewart Pollens (1995, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) is an authoritative work covering the ancestry of the piano, its invention by Cristofori, and the early stages of its subsequent evolution.



*  
*   
*  
*  
*  
*    
*




;Information
*  Yamaha Musician - Yamaha piano reviews and enthusiast site 
*  Grand Piano information and images
*  The Piano Page Lots of information from the Piano Technicians Guild
*  WikiRecording's Guide to Recording Pianos
;History
*  History of the Piano Forte, Association of Blind Piano Tuners, UK
*  The Frederick Historical Piano Collection
;Piano Technique
*  Principles of Piano Technique
;Sheet music for Piano
* All Piano Scores Free printable classical sheet music for piano + audio

Violin



The violin is a bowed string instrument with four strings usually tuned in perfect fifths. It is the smallest and highest-pitched member of the violin family of string instruments, which also includes the viola and cello.

A violin is sometimes informally called a fiddle, regardless of the type of music played on it. The word "violin" comes from the Middle Latin word vitula, meaning "stringed instrument";    this word is also believed to be the source of the Germanic "fiddle".     The violin, while it has ancient origins, acquired most of its modern characteristics in 16th-century Italy, with some further modifications occurring in the 18th century.  Violinists and collectors particularly prize the instruments made by the Stradivari, Guarneri and Amati families from the 16th to the 18th century in Cremona.

A person who makes or repairs violins is called a luthier, or simply a violin maker. The parts of a violin are usually made from different types of wood (although electric violins may not be made of wood at all, since their sound may not be dependent on specific acoustic characteristics of the instrument's construction), and it is generally strung with gut or steel strings.

Someone who plays the violin is called a violinist or a fiddler. He or she produces sound from a violin by either drawing a bow (normally held in the right hand) across one or more strings (which may be stopped by the fingers of the other hand to produce a full range of pitches), plucking the strings (with either hand), or a variety of other techniques.  The violin is played by musicians in a wide variety of musical genres, including classical, jazz, folk and traditional, and rock and roll.




The earliest stringed instruments were mostly plucked (e.g. the Greek lyre). Bowed instruments may have originated in the equestrian cultures of Central Asia, an example being the Mongolian instrument Morin huur:
:Turkic and Mongolian horsemen from Inner Asia were probably the world’s earliest fiddlers. Their two-stringed upright fiddles were strung with horsehair strings, played with horsehair bows, and often feature a carved horse’s head at the end of the neck. ... The violins, violas, and cellos we play today, and whose bows are still strung with horsehair, are a legacy of the nomads.

It is believed that these instruments eventually spread to China, India, and the Middle East, where they developed into instruments such as the erhu in China, the rebab in the Middle East, and the esraj in India. The violin in its present form emerged in early 16th century in Northern Italy, where the port towns of Venice and Genoa maintained extensive ties to central Asia through the trade routes of the silk road.

The modern European violin evolved from various bowed stringed instruments which were brought from the Middle East.    Most likely the first makers of violins borrowed from three types of current instruments: the rebec, in use since the 10th century (itself derived from the Arabic rebab), the Renaissance fiddle, and the lira da braccio.   
One of the earliest explicit descriptions of the instrument, including its tuning, was in the Epitome musical by Jambe de Fer, published in Lyon in 1556.    By this time, the violin had already begun to spread throughout Europe.

The oldest documented violin to have four strings, like the modern violin, is supposed to have been constructed in 1555 by Andrea Amati, but the date is doubtuful. (Other violins, documented significantly earlier, only had three strings.)  The violin immediately became very popular, both among street musicians and the nobility, illustrated by the fact that the French king Charles IX ordered Amati to construct 24 violins for him in 1560.    The oldest surviving violin, dated inside, is from this set, and is known as the "Charles IX," made in Cremona c. 1560. "The Messiah" or "Le Messie" (also known as the "Salabue") made by Antonio Stradivari in 1716 remains pristine, never having been used. It is now located in the Ashmolean Museum of Oxford.

San Zaccaria Altarpiece (detail), Venice, Giovanni Bellini, 1505
The most famous violin makers (luthiers) between the 16th century and the 18th century include:

* The school of Brescia, beginning in the 16th century
* The Amati family of Italian violin makers, active 1500-1740 in Cremona, Italy
* The Guarneri family, active 1626-1744 in Cremona
* The Stradivari family, active 1644-1737 in Cremona

Significant changes occurred in the construction of the violin in the 18th century, particularly in the length and angle of the neck, as well as a heavier bass bar. The majority of old instruments have undergone these modifications, and hence are in a significantly different state than when they left the hands of their makers, doubtless with differences in sound and response.       But these instruments in their present condition set the standard for perfection in violin craftsmanship and sound, and violin makers all over the world try to come as close to this ideal as possible.

To this day, instruments from the "Golden Age" of violin making, especially those made by Stradivari and Guarneri del Gesù, are the most sought-after instruments by both collectors and performers.



The construction of a violin

A violin typically consists of a spruce top (the soundboard, also known as the top plate, table, or belly), maple ribs and back, two endblocks, a neck, a bridge, a soundpost, four strings, and various fittings, optionally including a chinrest, which may attach directly over, or to the left of, the tailpiece. A distinctive feature of a violin body is its "hourglass" shape and the arching of its top and back. The hourglass shape comprises two upper bouts, two lower bouts, and two concave C-bouts at the "waist," providing clearance for the bow.

The "voice" of a violin depends on its shape, the wood it is made from, the graduation (the thickness profile) of both the top and back, and the varnish which coats its outside surface. The varnish and especially the wood continue to improve with age, making the fixed supply of old violins much sought-after.

All parts of the instrument which are glued together are done so using animal hide glue, a traditional strong water-based adhesive that is reversible, as glued joints can be disassembled if needed. Weaker, diluted glue is usually used to fasten the top to the ribs, and the nut to the fingerboard, since common repairs involve removing these parts.

The purfling running around the edge of the spruce top provides some protection against cracks originating at the edge. It also allows the top to flex more independently of the rib structure. Painted-on faux purfling on the top is a sign of an inferior instrument. The back and ribs are typically made of maple, most often with a matching striped figure, referred to as "flame," "fiddleback" or "tiger stripe"

The neck is usually maple with a flamed figure compatible with that of the ribs and back. It carries the fingerboard, typically made of ebony, but often some other wood stained or painted black. Ebony is the preferred material because of its hardness, beauty, and superior resistance to wear. Fingerboards are dressed to a particular transverse curve, and have a small lengthwise "scoop," or concavity, slightly more pronounced on the lower strings, especially when meant for gut or synthetic strings.

Some old violins (and some made to appear old) have a grafted scroll, evidenced by a glue joint between the pegbox and neck. Many authentic old instruments have had their necks reset to a slightly increased angle, and lengthened by about a centimeter. The neck graft allows the original scroll to be kept with a Baroque violin when bringing its neck into conformance with modern standards.

Closeup of a violin tailpiece, with a fleur-de-lis
Front and back views of violin bridge
Sound post seen through f-hole
The bridge is a precisely cut piece of maple that forms the lower anchor point of the vibrating length of the strings and transmits the vibration of the strings to the body of the instrument. Its top curve holds the strings at the proper height from the fingerboard in an arc, allowing each to be sounded separately by the bow. The sound post, or "soul post," fits precisely inside the instrument between the back and top, below the treble foot of the bridge, which it helps support. It also transmits vibrations between the top and the back of the instrument.

The tailpiece anchors the strings to the lower bout of the violin by means of the tailgut, which loops around an ebony button called the tailpin (sometimes confusingly called "endpin" like the cello's spike), which fits into a tapered hole in the bottom block. Very often the E string will have a fine tuning lever worked by a small screw turned by the fingers. Fine tuners may also be applied to the other strings, especially on a student instrument, and are sometimes built into the tailpiece.

At the scroll end, the strings wind around the tuning pegs in the pegbox. Strings usually have a colored silk wrapping at both ends, for identification and to provide friction against the pegs. The tapered pegs allow friction to be increased or decreased by the player applying appropriate pressure along the axis of the peg while turning it.
Violin and bow.




Strings were first made of sheep gut (commonly known as catgut), stretched, dried and twisted. Modern strings may be gut, solid steel, stranded steel, or various synthetic materials, wound with various metals. Most E strings are unwound, either plain or gold-plated steel.

Violinists often carry replacement strings with their instruments to have one available in case a string breaks. Strings have a limited lifetime; apart from obvious things, such as the winding of a string coming undone from wear, a player will generally change a string when it no longer plays "true," with a negative effect on intonation, or when it loses the desired tone. The longevity of a string depends on how much and how intensely one plays.



The compass of the violin is from G3 (G below middle C) to C8 (the highest note of the modern piano.)  The top notes, however, are often produced by natural or artificial harmonics.




The arched shape, the thickness of the wood, and its physical qualities govern the sound of a violin. Patterns of the nodes made by sand or glitter sprinkled on the plates with the plate vibrated at certain frequencies, called "Chladni patterns," are occasionally used by luthiers to verify their work before assembling the instrument.



Children typically use smaller string instruments than adults. Violins are made in so-called "fractional" sizes for young students: Apart from full-size (4/4) violins, 3/4, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/10, 1/16, and even 1/32-sized instruments exist. Extremely small sizes were developed, along with the Suzuki program for violin students as young as 3 years old. Finely-made fractional sized violins, especially smaller than 1/2 size, are extremely rare or nonexistent. Such small instruments are typically intended for beginners needing a rugged violin, and whose rudimentary technique does not justify the expense of a more carefully made one.

These fractional sizes have nothing to do with the actual dimensions of an instrument; in other words, a 3/4-sized instrument is not three-quarters the length of a full size instrument. The body length (not including the neck) of a "full-size" or 4/4 violin is about 14 inches (35 cm), smaller in some 17th century models. A 3/4 violin is about 13 inches (33 cm), and a 1/2 size is approximately 12 inches (30 cm). With the violin's closest family member, the viola, size is specified as body length in inches or centimeters rather than fractional sizes. A "full-size" viola averages 16 inches (40 cm).

Occasionally, an adult with a small frame may use a so-called "7/8" size violin instead of a full-size instrument.  Sometimes called a "lady's violin", these instruments are slightly shorter than a full size violin, but tend to be high-quality instruments capable of producing a sound that is comparable to fine full size violins.

Violin sizes are not standardized and dimensions vary slightly between makers.



Scroll and pegbox, correctly strung
The pitches of open strings on a violin
Violins are tuned by turning the pegs in the pegbox under the scroll, or by adjusting the fine tuner screws at the tailpiece. All violins have pegs; fine tuners (also called fine adjusters) are optional. Most fine tuners consist of a metal screw that moves a lever to which the string is attached. They permit very small pitch adjustments with much more ease than the pegs.

Fine tuners are usually used with solid metal or composite strings that may be difficult to tune with pegs alone; they are not used with gut strings, which are more elastic and do not respond adequately to the very small movements of fine tuners. Some violinists have fine tuners on all 4 strings; most classical players have only a single fine tuner on the E string.

To tune a violin, the A string is first tuned to a standard pitch (usually 440 Hz), using either a tuning device or another instrument. (When accompanying a fixed-pitch instrument such as a piano or accordion, the violin tunes to it.) The other strings are then tuned against each other in intervals of perfect fifths by bowing them in pairs. A minutely higher tuning is sometimes employed for solo playing to give the instrument a brighter sound; conversely, Baroque music is sometimes played using lower tunings to make the violin's sound more gentle. After tuning, the instrument's bridge may be examined to ensure that it is standing straight and centered between the inner nicks of the f-holes; a crooked bridge may significantly affect the sound of an otherwise well-made violin.

The tuning G-D-A-E is used for most violin music. Other tunings are occasionally employed; the G string, for example, can be tuned up to A. The use of nonstandard tunings in classical music is known as scordatura; in some folk styles, it is called "cross-tuning." One famous example of scordatura in classical music is Saint-Saëns' Danse Macabre, where the solo violin's E string is tuned down to E flat to impart an eerie dissonance to the composition.  Another example would be in the third movement of Contrasts, by Béla Bartók, where the E string is tuned down to E flat and the G tuned to a G sharp.

In Indian classical music and Indian light music, the violin is likely to be tuned to D#-A#-D#-A# in the South Indian style. As there is no concept of absolute pitch in Indian classical music, any convenient tuning maintaining these relative pitch intervals between the strings can be used. Another prevalent tuning with these intervals is F-Bb-F-Bb, which corresponds to Sa-Pa-Sa-Pa in the Indian carnatic classical music style. In the North Indian "Hindustani" style, the tuning is usually Pa-Sa-Pa-Sa instead of Sa-Pa-Sa-Pa. This could correspond to Bb-F-Bb-F, for instance.

While most violins have four strings, there are some instruments with five strings,    six, or even seven. The extra strings on such violins typically are lower in pitch than the G-string; these strings are usually tuned to C, F, and B flat. If the instrument's playing length, or string length from nut to bridge, is equal to that of an ordinary full-scale violin i.e., a bit less than  , then it may be properly termed a violin. Some such instruments are somewhat longer and should be regarded as violas. Violins with five strings or more are often used in jazz or folk music.



  Archetier,   Bow makers
Bow frogs, top to bottom: violin, viola, cello
A violin is usually played using a bow consisting of a stick with a ribbon of horsehair strung between the tip and frog (or nut, or heel) at opposite ends. A typical violin bow may be 75 cm (29 inches) overall, and weigh about 60 g (2 oz). Viola bows may be about 5 mm (3/16") shorter and 10 g (1/3 oz) heavier.

At the frog end, a screw adjuster tightens or loosens the hair. Just forward of the frog, a leather thumb cushion and winding protect the stick and provide grip for the player's hand. The winding may be wire, silk, or whalebone (now imitated by alternating strips of yellow and black plastic.) Some student bows (particularly the ones made of solid fiberglass) substitute a plastic sleeve for grip and winding.

The hair of the bow traditionally comes from the tail of a "white" (technically, a grey) male horse, although some cheaper bows use synthetic fiber. Occasional rubbing with rosin makes the hair grip the strings intermittently, causing them to vibrate. The stick is traditionally made of brazilwood, although a stick made from this type of wood which is of a more select quality (and higher price) is referred to as pernambuco (both types are taken from the same tree species). Some student bows are made of fiberglass or various cheap woods.  Recent innovations have allowed carbon fiber to be used as a material for the stick at all levels of craftsmanship.




The standard way of holding the violin is with the left side of the jaw resting on the chinrest of the violin, and supported by the left shoulder, often assisted by a shoulder rest. This practice varies in some cultures; for instance, Indian (Carnatic and Hindustani) violinists play seated on the floor and rest the scroll of the instrument on the side of their foot. The strings may be sounded by drawing the hair of the bow across them (arco) or by plucking them (pizzicato). The left hand regulates the sounding length of the string by stopping it against the fingerboard with the fingertips, producing different pitches.

First Position Fingerings



As the violin has no frets to stop the strings, the player must know exactly where to place the fingers on the strings to play with good intonation. Through practice and ear training, the violinist's left hand finds the notes intuitively by muscle memory. Beginners sometimes rely on tapes placed on the fingerboard for proper left hand finger placement, but usually abandon the tapes quickly as they advance. Another commonly-used marking technique uses dots of white-out on the fingerboard, which wear off in a few weeks of regular practice. This practice, unfortunately, is used sometimes in lieu of adequate ear-training, guiding the placement of fingers  by eye and not by ear. Especially in the early stages of learning to play, the so-called "ringing tones" are useful. There are nine such notes in first position, where a stopped note sounds a unison or octave with another (open) string, causing it to vibrate sympathetically.

The fingers are conventionally numbered 1 (index) through 4 (little finger).  Especially in instructional editions of violin music, numbers over the notes may indicate which finger to use, with "0" indicating "open" string. The chart to the right shows the arrangement of notes reachable in first position. Not shown on this chart is the way the spacing between note positions becomes closer as the fingers move up (in pitch) from the nut.  The bars at the sides of the chart represent the usual possibilities for beginners' tape placements, at 1 st , high 2 nd , 3 rd , and 4 th  fingers.



The placement of the left hand on the fingerboard is characterized by "positions".  First position, where most beginners start (although some methods start in third position), is the most commonly used position in string music. The lowest note available in this position in standard tuning is an open G; the highest note in first position is played with the fourth finger on the E-string, sounding a B, or reaching up a half step (also known as the "extended fourth finger") to the C two octaves above middle C.

Moving the hand up the neck, so the first finger takes the place of the second finger, brings the player into second position. Letting the first finger take the first-position place of the third finger brings the player to third position, and so on. The upper limit of the violin's range is largely determined by the skill of the player, who may easily play more than two octaves on a single string, and four octaves on the instrument as a whole, although when a violinist has progressed to the point of being able to use the entire range of the instrument, references to particular positions become less common. Position names are mostly used for the lower positions and in method books; for this reason, it is uncommon to hear references to anything higher than fifth position. The lowest position on a violin is half-position, where the first finger is a half-step away from the nut. This position is less frequently used. The highest position, practically speaking, is 15 th  position.

The same note will sound substantially different, depending on what string is used to play it. Sometimes the composer or arranger will specify the string to be used in order to achieve the desired tone quality; this is indicated in the music by the marking, for example, sul G, meaning to play on the G string. For example, playing very high up on the lower strings gives a distinctive quality to the sound. Otherwise, moving into different positions is usually done for ease of playing.



Bowing or plucking an open string that is, a string played without any finger stopping it gives a different sound from a stopped string, since the string vibrates more freely at the nut than under a finger. Other than the low G (which can be played in no other way), open strings are generally avoided in some styles of classical playing. This is because they have a somewhat harsher sound (especially open E) and it is not possible to directly use vibrato on an open string. However, this can be partially compensated by applying vibrato on a note that is an octave higher than the open string.

In some cases playing an open string is called for by the composer (and explicitly marked in the music) for special effect, decided upon by the musician for artistic reasons (common in earlier works such as Bach), or played in a fast passage, where they usually cannot be distinguished.

Playing an open string simultaneously with a stopped note on an adjacent string produces a bagpipe-like drone, often used by composers in imitation of folk music. Sometimes the two notes are identical (for instance, playing a fingered A on the D string against the open A string), giving a ringing sort of "fiddling" sound. Playing an open string simultaneously with an identical stopped note can also be called for when more volume is required, especially in orchestral playing.




Double stopping is when two separate strings are stopped by the fingers, and bowed simultaneously, producing a chord. Sometimes moving to a higher position is necessary for the left hand to be able to reach both notes at once. Sounding an open string alongside a fingered note is another way to get a partial chord. While sometimes also called a double stop, it is more properly called a drone, as the drone note may be sustained for a passage of different notes played on the adjacent string. Three or four notes can also be played at one time (triple and quadruple stops, respectively), and, according to the style of music, the notes might all be played simultaneously or might be played as two successive double stops, favoring the higher notes. Playing the notes simultaneously is done by applying more pressure to the bow and/or bowing closer to the fingerboard.




Vibrato is a technique of the left hand and arm in which the pitch of a note varies in a pulsating rhythm. While various parts of the hand or arm may be involved in the motion, the end result is a movement of the fingertip bringing about a slight change in vibrating string length. Violinists oscillate backwards, or lower in pitch from the actual note when using vibrato, since perception favors the highest pitch in a varying sound . Vibrato does little, if anything, to disguise an out-of-tune note: in other words, vibrato is a poor substitute for good intonation. Still, scales and other exercises meant to work on intonation are typically played without vibrato to make the work easier and  more effective. Music students are taught that unless otherwise marked in music, vibrato is assumed or even mandatory. This can be an obstacle to a classically-trained violinist wishing to play in a style that uses little or no vibrato at all, such as baroque music played in period style and many traditional fiddling styles.

Vibrato can be produced by a proper combination of finger, wrist and arm motions. One method, called "hand vibrato," involves rocking the hand back at the wrist to achieve oscillation, while another method, "arm vibrato," modulates the pitch by rocking at the elbow. A combination of these techniques allows a player to produce a large variety of tonal effects.

The "when" and "what for" of violin vibrato are artistic matters of style and taste. In acoustical terms, the interest that vibrato adds to the sound has to do with the way that the overtone mix (or tone color, or timbre) and the directional pattern of sound projection change with changes in pitch. By "pointing" the sound at different parts of the room in a rhythmic way, vibrato adds a "shimmer" or "liveliness" to the sound of a well-made violin. See  Schleske and  Weinreich.




Vibrato can also be used for a fast trill. A trill initiated from just hammering the finger up and down on the fingerboard will create a harsher quality than with a vibrato trill. For example, if trilling on the first finger, the second finger is placed very slightly off the string and vibrato is implemented. The second finger will lightly touch the string above the first finger causing the pitch to change. This has a softer quality and many think it is nicer-sounding than a hammered trill. Note - this trill technique only works well for semi-tonal trills, it is far more difficult to vibrato trill for an interval of a tone or more.



Lightly touching the string with a fingertip at a harmonic node creates harmonics. Instead of the normal tone, a higher pitched note sounds.   Each node is at an integer division of the string, for example half-way or one-third along the length of the string. A responsive instrument will sound numerous possible harmonic nodes along the length of the string. Harmonics are marked in music either with a little circle above the note that determines the pitch of the harmonic, or by diamond-shaped note heads. There are two types of harmonics: natural harmonics and artificial harmonics (also known as "false harmonics").

Natural harmonics are played on an open string. The pitch of the open string is called the fundamental frequency.  Harmonics are also called overtones. They occur at whole-number multiples of the fundamental, which is called the first harmonic.  The second harmonic is the first overtone, the third harmonic is the second overtone, and so on. The second harmonic is in the middle of the string and sounds an octave higher than the string's pitch.  The third harmonic breaks the string into thirds and sounds an octave and a fifth above the fundamental, and the fourth harmonic breaks the string into quarters sounding two octaves above the first. The sound of the second harmonic is the clearest of them all, because it is a common node with all the succeeding even-numbered harmonics (4th, 6th, etc.). The third and succeeding odd-numbered harmonics are harder to play because they break the string into an odd number of vibrating parts and do not share as many nodes with other harmonics.

Artificial harmonics are more difficult to produce than natural harmonics, as they involve both stopping the string and playing a harmonic on the stopped note. Using the "octave frame" the normal distance between the first and fourth fingers in any given position with the fourth finger just touching the string a fourth higher than the stopped note produces the fourth harmonic, two octaves above the stopped note. Finger placement and pressure, as well as bow speed, pressure, and sounding point are all essential in getting the desired harmonic to sound. And to add to the challenge, in passages with different notes played as false harmonics, the distance between stopping finger and harmonic finger must constantly change, since the spacing between notes changes along the length of the string.

The "harmonic finger" can also touch at a major third above the pressed note (the fifth harmonic), or a fifth higher (a third harmonic).  These harmonics are less commonly used; in the case of the major third, both the stopped note and touched note must be played slightly sharp otherwise the harmonic does not speak as readily.  In the case of the fifth, the stretch is greater than is comfortable for many violinists. In the general repertoire fractions smaller than a sixth are not used.  However, divisions up to an eighth are sometimes used and, given a good instrument and a skilled player, divisions as small as a twelfth are possible.

There are a few books dedicated solely to the study of violin harmonics. Two comprehensive works are Henryk Heller's seven-volume Theory of Harmonics, published by Simrock in 1928, and Michelangelo Abbado's five-volume Tecnica dei suoni armonici published by Ricordi in 1934.

Elaborate passages in artificial harmonics can be found in virtuoso violin literature, especially of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Two notable examples of this are an entire section of Vittorio Monti's Csárdás and a passage towards the middle of the third movement of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto.



The right arm, hand, and bow are responsible for tone quality, rhythm, dynamics, articulation, and most (but not all) changes in timbre.



The most essential part of bowing technique is the bow grip. It is usually with the thumb bent in the small area between the frog and the winding of the bow. The other fingers are spread somewhat evenly across the top part of the bow.

The violin produces louder notes with greater bow speed or more weight on the string.  The two methods are not equivalent, because they produce different timbres; pressing down on the string tends to produce a harsher, more intense sound.

The sounding point where the bow intersects the string also influences timbre. Playing close to the bridge (sul ponticello) gives a more intense sound than usual, emphasizing the higher harmonics; and playing with the bow over the end of the fingerboard (sul tasto) makes for a delicate, ethereal sound, emphasizing the fundamental frequency. Dr. Suzuki referred to the sounding point as the "Kreisler highway"; one may think of different sounding points as "lanes" in the highway.

Various methods of 'attack' with the bow produce different articulations. There are many bowing techniques that allow for every range of playing style and many teachers, players, and orchestras spend a lot of time developing techniques and creating a unified technique within the group. These techniques include legato-style bowing, collé, ricochet, sautillé, martelé, spiccato, and staccato.



A note marked pizz. (abbreviation for pizzicato) in the written music is to be played by plucking the string with a finger of the right hand rather than by bowing. (The index finger is most commonly used here.) Sometimes in virtuoso solo music where the bow hand is occupied (or for show-off effect), left-hand pizzicato will be indicated by a "+" (plus sign) below or above the note.  In left-hand pizzicato, two fingers are put on the string; one (usually the index or middle finger) is put on the correct note, and the other (usually the ring finger or little finger) is put above the note. The higher finger then plucks the string while the lower one stays on, thus producing the correct pitch. By increasing the force of the pluck, one can increase the volume of the note that the string produces.



A marking of col legno (Italian for "with the wood") in the written music calls for striking the string(s) with the stick of the bow, rather than by drawing the hair of the bow across the strings.  This bowing technique is somewhat rarely used, and results in a muted percussive sound. The eerie quality of a violin section playing col legno is exploited in some symphonic pieces, notably the "Witches' Dance" of the last movement of Berlioz's Symphonie Fantastique.  Saint-Saens' symphonic poem "Danse Macabre" includes the string section using the col legno technique to imitate the sound of dancing skeletons. "Mars" from Gustav Holst's "The Planets" uses col legno to play a repeated rhythm in 5/4 time signature.  Some violinists, however, object to this style of playing as it can damage the finish and impair the value of a fine bow.



Literally "hammered", a strongly accented effect produced by releasing each bowstroke forcefully and suddenly. Martelé can be played in any part of the bow. It is sometimes indicated in written music by an arrowhead.



Very rapid repetition (typically of a single note, but occasionally of multiple notes), usually played at the tip of the bow.



Attaching a small metal, rubber, or wooden device called a "mute" to the bridge of the violin gives a softer, more mellow tone, with fewer audible overtones; the sound of an entire orchestral string section playing with mutes has a hushed quality. The conventional Italian markings for mute usage are con sord., or con sordina, "with mute", and senza sord., "without mute" or via sord., "mute out." Larger metal, rubber, or wooden mutes are available, known as "practice mutes" or "hotel mutes".  Such mutes are generally not used in performance, but are used to deaden the sound of the violin in practice areas such as hotel rooms. Some composers have used practice mutes for special effect, for example at the end of Luciano Berio's Sequenza VIII for solo violin.



Since the Baroque era, the violin has been one of the most important of all instruments in classical music, for several reasons.  The tone of the violin stands out above other instruments, making it appropriate for playing a melody line.  In the hands of a good player, the violin is extremely agile, and can execute rapid and difficult sequences of notes.

Violins make up a large part of an orchestra, and are usually divided into two sections, known as the first and second violins. Composers often assign the melody to the first violins, while second violins play harmony, accompaniment patterns or the melody an octave lower than the first violins. A string quartet similarly has parts for first and second violins, as well as a viola part, and a bass instrument, such as the cello or, rarely, the double bass.

String instruments have the ability to play in any pitch which, in the hands of great players, leads to wonderful range of harmonic colouring, making it possible for the instruments to be very expressive. This ability is at its finest in the string quartet literature where seamless changes from key to key and chord to chord create a kind of perfect harmonic world where even thirds ring with full resonance.



The earliest references to jazz performance using the violin as a solo instrument are documented during the first decades of the 20th century. The first great jazz violinist was Joe Venuti who is best known for his work with guitarist Eddie Lang during the 1920s. Since that time there have been many superb improvising violinists including Stéphane Grappelli, Stuff Smith, Regina Carter, Johnny Frigo, John Blake and Jean-Luc Ponty. While not primarily jazz violinists, Darol Anger and Mark O'Connor have spent significant parts of their careers playing jazz.

Violins also appear in ensembles supplying orchestral backgrounds to many jazz recordings.



Up to the 1970s, most types of popular music used bowed strings.  The hugely popular Motown recordings of the 1960s and 1970s relied heavily on strings as part of their trademark texture. Earlier genres of pop music, at least those separate from the rock and roll movement, tended to make use of fairly traditional orchestras, sometimes large ones; examples include the American "Crooners" such as Bing Crosby.  This carried through into 1970s disco music such as "I Will Survive" by Gloria Gaynor and "Love's Theme" by Love Unlimited Orchestra.

The rise of electronically created music in the 1980s saw a decline in their use, as synthesized string sections took their place. However, while the violin has very little usage in rock music, it has some history in progressive rock (e.g. The Electric Light Orchestra, King Crimson,  Kansas) and has a stronger place in modern fusion bands, notably The Corrs.   The fiddle has also always been a part of British folk-rock music, as exemplified by the likes of Fairport Convention and Steeleye Span.

The popularity of crossover music beginning in the last years of the 20th century has brought the violin back into the popular music arena, with both electric and acoustic violins being used by popular bands.  Dave Matthews Band features violinist Boyd Tinsley.  The Flock featured violinist Jerry Goodman who later joined the jazz-rock fusion band, The Mahavishnu Orchestra. Yellowcard featured the instrument with a role equal to the guitar in many of their songs. Smashing Pumpkins are well-known for their violin-based sections. James' Saul Davies, who is also a guitarist, was enlisted by the band as a violinist. For their first three albums and related singles, the British group No-Man made extensive use of electric and acoustic solo violin as played by band member Ben Coleman (who played violin exclusively).

Independent artists such as Owen Pallet and Andrew Bird have also spurred increased interest in the instrument. Indie bands have often embraced new and unusual arrangements, allowing them more freedom to feature the violin than their mainstream brethren.  It has been used in the post-rock genre by bands such as Sigur Rós, Zox, Broken Social Scene, and A Silver Mt. Zion. The electric violin has even been used by bands like The Crüxshadows within the context of keyboard based music.

Indian and Arabic pop music is filled with the sound of violins, both soloists and ensembles.




The violin is a very important part of South Indian classical music (Karnatic music). It is believed to have been introduced to the South Indian tradition by Baluswamy Dikshitar. Though primarily used as an accompaniment instrument, the violin has become popular as a solo instrument in the orchestration. Popular film composers such as Ilaiyaraaja have used the violin extensively in film music scoring. This type of music was often played on a harmonic scale.



Hins-Anders painted by Anders Zorn, 1904
Like many other instruments used in classical music, the violin descends from remote ancestors that were used for folk music.  Following a stage of intensive development in the late Renaissance, largely in Italy, the violin had improved (in volume, tone, and agility), to the point that it not only became a very important instrument in art music, but proved highly appealing to folk musicians as well, ultimately spreading very widely, sometimes displacing earlier bowed instruments. Ethnomusicologists have observed its widespread use in Europe, Asia, and the Americas.

In many traditions of folk music, the tunes are not written but are memorized by successive generations of musicians and passed on, in what is known as the oral tradition.




When played as a folk instrument, the violin is ordinarily referred to in English as a fiddle (though the term "fiddle" may be used informally no matter what the genre of music). There is technically no difference between a fiddle and a violin. However, some folk fiddlers alter their instruments for various reasons. One example may be seen in American (e.g., bluegrass and old-time) fiddling: in these styles, the bridge is sometimes shaved down so that it is less curved. This makes it easier to play double stops and triple stops, allowing one to play chords with less effort. In addition, many fiddle players prefer to use a tailpiece with fine tuners on all four strings instead of only using one on the E string as many classical players do.




acoustic and electric violin
An electric violin is a violin equipped with an electric signal output of its sound, and is generally considered to be a specially constructed instrument which can either be:
* an electro-acoustic violin capable of producing both acoustic sound and electric signal
* an electric violin capable of producing only electric signal

To be effective as an acoustic violin, electro-acoustic violins retain much of the resonating body of the violin, often looking very much like, sometimes even identical to, an acoustic violin or fiddle.  They are often varnished with bright colours and made from alternative materials to wood.
The first specially built electric violins date back to the late 1930s and were made by Victor Pfeil, Oskar Vierling, George Eisenberg, Benjamin Miessner, George Beauchamp, Hugo Benioff and Fredray Kislingbury.  The majority of the first electric violinists were musicians playing jazz and popular music.




Violin authentication is the process of determining the maker and manufacture date of a violin. This process is similar to that used to determine the provenance of art works.  As significant value may be attached to violins made either by specific makers or at specific times and locations, forgery and other methods of fraudulent misrepresentation can be used to inflate the value of an instrument.




For instruments related to the violin, see String instruments.

*List of violinists
*Violin concerto
*Violin sonata
*Carnatic Violin
*Electric violin
*Baroque violin

*Luthier
*Stroh violin
*Violin making and maintenance
*Basic physics of the violin
*Stradivarius



*Principles of Violin Playing and Teaching, by Ivan Galamian (1999), Shar Products Co. ISBN 0-9621416-3-1
*The Contemporary Violin: Extended Performance Techniques, by Patricia and Allen Strange (2001), University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-22409-4
* The Fiddle Book, by Marion Thede (1970), Oak Publications. ISBN 0-8256-0145-2
*Latin Violin, by Sam Bardfeld, ISBN 0-9628467-7-5
*The Cambridge Companion to the Violin, edited by Robin Stowell (1992), Cambridge University Press.  ISBN 0-521-39033-8
*The Violin Explained - Components Mechanism and Sound by James Beament (1992/1997), Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-816623-0
*'' Antonio Stradivari, his life and work, 1644-1737', by William Henry Hill;  Arthur F Hill;  Alfred Ebsworth Hill (1902/1963), Dover Publications. 1963. OCLC 172278.  ISBN 0486204251
*An Encyclopedia of the Violin, by Alberto Bachmann (1965/1990), Da Capo Press. ISBN 0-306-80004-7
*Violin - And Easy Guide, by Chris Coetzee (2003), New Holland Publishers. ISBN 1-84330-332-9
*The Violin, by Yehudi Menuhin (1996), Flammarion.  ISBN 2-08-013623-2
*The Book of the Violin, edited by Dominic Gill (1984), Phaidon.  ISBN 0-7148-2286-8
*Violin-Making as it was, and is, by Ed. Heron-Allen (1885/1994), Ward Lock Limited.  ISBN 0-7063-1045-4
*Violins & Violinists, by Franz Farga (1950), Rockliff Publishing Corporation Ltd.
*Viols, Violins and Virginals, by Jennifer A. Charlton (1985), Ashmolean Museum.  ISBN 0-907849-44-X
*The Violin, by Theodore Rowland-Entwistle (1967/1974), Dover Publications. ISBN 0-340-05992-3
*The Early Violin and Viola, by Robin Stowell (2001), Cambridge University Press.  ISBN 0-521-62555-6
* The Complete Luthier's Library. A Useful International Critical Bibliography for the Maker and the Connoisseur of Stringed and Plucked Instruments by Roberto Regazzi, Bologna: Florenus, 1990. ISBN 88-85250-01-7
*The Violin, by George Dubourg (1854), Robert Cocks & Co.
*Violin Technique and Performance Practice in the Late 18th and Early 19th Centuries, by Robin Stowell (1985), Cambridge University Press.  ISBN 0-521-23279-1
*History of the Violin, by William Sandys and Simon Andrew (2006), Dover Publications.  ISBN 0-486-45269-7
*The Violin:  A Research and Information Guide, by Mark Katz (2006), Routledge.  ISBN 0-8153-3637-3
*Per gli occhi e 'l core. Strumenti musicali nell'arte by Flavio Dassenno, (2004) a complete survey of the brescian school defined by the last researches and documents.



* Templeton, David,  ''Fresh Prince: Joshua Bell on composition, hyperviolins, and the future, Strings magazine, October 2002, No. 105.
* Young, Diana.  A Methodology for Investigation of Bowed String Performance Through Measurement of Violin Bowing Technique. PhD Thesis. M.I.T., 2007.



*  The violin website - All about violin: players, history, articles, links... 
*  The history of the violin - A quick overview about the history of the violin, including answers to questions such as "Why old master instruments sound so good"
*  National Music Museum- Violins Pictures of violins by Andrea Amati, Cremona, ca. 1560, and other rare instruments.
*  Bowed Radio Weekly podcast featuring creative violinists.
*  Violin Acoustics - University of New South Wales
*  Musical Instrument Samples - University of Iowa Electronic Music Studios; anechoic recordings of violin sounds, both arco and pizzicato at various dynamics.
*  Why is the violin so hard to play? - Answers this question, as well as explaining the mechanics of bowed strings. Technical but very accessible.
*  Path Through the Woods - The Use of Medical Imaging in Examining Historical Instruments The use of computer-aided tomography to examine the dendochronology of the great Italian instruments

Trumpet



The trumpet is a musical instrument with the highest register in the brass family.    /ref> Trumpets are among the oldest musical instruments,

dating back to at least 1500 BC. They are constructed of brass tubing bent twice into an oblong shape, and are played by blowing air through closed lips, producing a "buzzing" sound which starts a standing wave vibration in the air column inside the trumpet.

There are several types of trumpet; the most common is a transposing instrument pitched in B . The predecessors to trumpets did not have valves; however, modern trumpets have either three piston valves or three rotary valves, each of which increases the length of tubing when engaged, thereby lowering the pitch.

The trumpet is used in many forms of music, including classical music and jazz.



Moche Trumpet. 300 AD Larco Museum Collection Lima, Peru.

The earliest trumpets date back to 1500 BC and earlier. The bronze and silver trumpets from Tutankhamun's grave in Egypt, bronze lurs from Scandinavia, and metal trumpets from China date back to this period. Edward Tarr, The Trumpet (Portland, Oregon: Amadeus Press, 1988), 20-30.  Trumpets from the Oxus civilization (3rd millennium BC) of Central Asia have decorated swellings in the middle, yet are made out of one sheet of metal, which is considered a technical wonder. "Trumpet with a swelling decorated with a human head," Musée du Louvre,   The Moche people of ancient Peru depicted trumpets in their art going back to 300 AD  Berrin, Katherine & Larco Museum. The Spirit of Ancient Peru:Treasures from the Museo Arqueológico Rafael Larco Herrera. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1997.  The earliest trumpets were signaling instruments used for military or religious purposes, rather than music in the modern sense;

and the modern bugle continues this signaling tradition. 
Reproduction Baroque trumpet by Michael Laird
In medieval times, trumpet playing was a guarded craft, its instruction occurring only within highly selective guilds. The trumpet players were often among the most heavily guarded members of a troop, as they were relied upon to relay instructions to other sections of the army. Improvements to instrument design and metal making in the late Middle Ages and Renaissance led to an increased usefulness of the trumpet as a musical instrument. The development of the upper, "clarino" register by specialist trumpeters - notably Cesare Bendinelli - would lend itself well to the Baroque era, also known as the "Golden Age of the natural trumpet."

The melody-dominated homophony of the classical and romantic periods relegated the trumpet to a secondary role by most major composers. Berlioz wrote in 1844:

"Notwithstanding the real loftiness and distinguished nature of its quality of tone, there are few instruments that have been more degraded (than the trumpet). Down to Beethoven and Weber, every composer - not excepting Mozart - persisted in confining it to the unworthy function of filling up, or in causing it to sound two or three commonplace rhythmical formulae." Berlioz, Hector (1844). Treatise on modern Instrumentation and Orchestration.  Edwin F. Kalmus, NY, 1948.

The trumpet was slow to adopt the modern valves (invented around the mid 1830s), and its cousin the cornet would take the spotlight as solo instrument for the next hundred years. Crooks and shanks (removable tubing of various lengths) as opposed to keys or valves were standard, notably in France, into the first part of the 20th century.



Trumpet valve bypass (depressed)
The trumpet is constructed of brass tubing bent twice into an oblong shape.

The trumpet and trombone share a roughly cylindrical bore which results in a bright, loud sound.  The bore is actually a complex series of tapers, smaller at the mouthpiece receiver and larger just before the flare of  the bell begins; careful design of these tapers is critical to the intonation of the instrument. By comparison, the cornet and flugelhorn have conical bores and produce a more mellow tone.

As with all brass instruments, sound is produced by blowing air through closed lips, producing a "buzzing" sound into the mouthpiece and starting a standing wave vibration in the air column inside the trumpet. The player can select the pitch from a range of overtones or harmonics by changing the lip aperture and tension (known as the embouchure). Modern trumpets also have three piston valves, each of which increases the length of tubing when engaged, thereby lowering the pitch. The first valve lowers the instrument's pitch by a whole step (2 semitones), the second valve by a half step (1 semitone), and the third valve by one-and-a-half steps (3 semitones).  When a fourth valve is present, as with some piccolo trumpets, it lowers the pitch a perfect fourth (5 semitones). Used singly and in combination these valves make the instrument fully chromatic, i.e., able to play all twelve pitches of Western music.  The sound is projected outward via the bell.

The trumpet's harmonic series is closely matched to the musical scale, but there are some notes in the series which are a compromise and thus slightly off key; these are known as wolf tones.  Some trumpets have a slide mechanism built in to compensate.

The mouthpiece has a circular rim which provides a comfortable environment for the lips' vibration.  Directly behind the rim is the cup, which channels the air into a much smaller opening (the back bore or shank) which tapers out slightly to match the diameter of the trumpet's lead pipe. The dimensions of these parts of the mouthpiece affect the timbre or quality of sound, the ease of playability, and player comfort. Generally, the wider and deeper the cup, the darker the sound and timbre.



The most common type is the B  trumpet, but C, D, E , E, F, G and A trumpets are also available.  The most common use of the C trumpet is in American orchestral playing, where it is used alongside the B  trumpet. Its slightly smaller size gives it a brighter, more lively sound. Because music written for early trumpets required the use of a different trumpet for each key — they did not have valves and therefore were not chromatic — and also because a player may choose to play a particular passage on a different trumpet from the one indicated on the written music, orchestra trumpet players are generally adept at transposing music at sight, sometimes playing music written for the B  trumpet on the C trumpet, and vice versa.

Piccolo trumpet in B , with swappable leadpipes to tune the instrument to B  (shorter) or A (longer)
Each trumpet's range extends from the written F  immediately below Middle C up to about three octaves higher. Standard repertoire rarely calls for notes beyond this range, and the fingering tables of most method books peak at the C (high C) two octaves above middle C.  Several trumpeters have achieved fame for their proficiency in the extreme high register, among them Lew Soloff, Andrea Tofanelli, Bill Chase, Maynard Ferguson, Roger Ingram, Wayne Bergeron, Anthony Gorruso,  Dizzy Gillespie, Jon Faddis, Cat Anderson, James Morrison, Doc Severinsen and Arturo Sandoval. It is also possible to produce pedal tones below the low F , although this technique is more often encountered as a sound-production exercise than as a written trumpet part.

The smallest trumpets are referred to as piccolo trumpets. The most common of these are built to play in both B  and A, with separate leadpipes for each key. The tubing in the B  piccolo trumpet is one-half the length of that in a standard B  trumpet. Piccolo trumpets in G, F and even C are also manufactured, but are rarer.  Many players use a smaller mouthpiece on the piccolo trumpet, which requires a different sound production technique from the B  trumpet and can limit endurance.  Almost all piccolo trumpets have four valves instead of the usual three — the fourth valve lowers the pitch, usually by a fourth, to facilitate the playing of lower notes.  Maurice André, Håkan Hardenberger, and Wynton Marsalis are some well-known piccolo trumpet players.
trumpet in C with rotary valves
Trumpets pitched in the key of G are also called sopranos, or soprano bugles, after their adaptation from military bugles.  Traditionally used in drum and bugle corps, sopranos have featured both rotary valves and piston valves.

The bass trumpet is usually played by a trombone player, being at the same pitch. Bass trumpet is played with a trombone or euphonium mouthpiece, and music for it is written in treble clef.

The modern slide trumpet is a B  trumpet that has a slide instead of valves. It is similar to a soprano trombone. The first slide trumpets emerged during the Renaissance, predating the modern trombone, and are the first attempts to increase chromaticism on the instrument. Slide trumpets were the first trumpets allowed in the Christian church. Tarr

The historical slide trumpet was probably first developed in the late fourteenth century for use in alta capella wind bands.  Deriving from early straight trumpets, the Renaissance slide trumpet was essentially a natural trumpet with a sliding leadpipe.  This single slide was rather awkward, as the entire corpus of the instrument moved, and the range of the slide was probably no more than a major third.  Originals were probably pitched in D, to fit with shawms in D and G, probably at a typical pitch standard near A=466.  As no instruments from this period are known to survive, the details - and even the existence - of a Renaissance slide trumpet is a matter of some conjecture, and there continues to be some debate among scholars.

Some slide trumpet designs saw use in England in the eighteenth century.

The pocket trumpet is a compact B  trumpet. The bell is usually smaller than a standard trumpet and the tubing is more tightly wound to reduce the instrument size without reducing the total tube length. Its design is not standardized, and the quality of various models varies greatly. It can have a tone quality and projection unique in the trumpet world: a warm sound and a voice-like articulation. Unfortunately, since many pocket trumpet models suffer from poor design as well as cheap and sloppy manufacturing, the intonation, tone color and dynamic range of such instruments are severely hindered. Professional-standard instruments are, however, available. While they are not a substitute for the full-sized instrument, they can be useful in certain contexts.

There are also rotary-valve, or German, trumpets, as well as alto and Baroque trumpets.

The trumpet is often confused with its close relative, the cornet, which has a more conical tubing shape compared to the trumpet's more cylindrical tube.  This, along with additional bends in the cornet's tubing, gives the cornet a slightly mellower tone, but the instruments are otherwise nearly identical.  They have the same length of tubing and, therefore, the same pitch, so music written for cornet and trumpet is interchangeable.  Another relative, the flugelhorn, has tubing that is even more conical than that of the cornet, and an even richer tone. It is sometimes augmented with a fourth valve to improve the intonation of some lower notes.



On any trumpet, cornet, or flugelhorn, pressing the valves indicated by the numbers below will produce the written notes shown - "OPEN" means all valves up, "1" means first valve, "1-2" means first and second valve simultaneously and so on. The concert pitch which sounds depends on the transposition of the instrument. Engaging the fourth valve, if present, drops any of these pitches by a perfect fourth as well. Within each overtone series, the different pitches are attained by changing the embouchure, or lip position and "firmness". Standard fingerings above high C are the same as for the notes an octave below (C  is 1-2, D is 1, etc.)

A step = a tone; a half step = a semitone

Note that the fundamental of each overtone series does not exist - the series begins with the first overtone. Notes in parentheses are the sixth overtone, representing a pitch with a frequency of seven times that of the fundamental; while this pitch is close to the note shown, it is slightly flat relative to equal temperament, and use of those fingerings is generally avoided.

The fingering schema arises from the length of each valve's tubing (a longer tube produces a lower pitch).  Valve "1" increases the tubing length enough to lower the pitch by one whole step, valve "2" by one half step, and valve "3" by one and a half steps.  This scheme and the nature of the overtone series create the possibility of alternate fingerings for certain notes.  For example, third-space "C" can be produced with no valves engaged (standard fingering) or with valves 2-3.  Also, any note produced with 1-2 as its standard fingering can also be produced with valve 3 - each drops the pitch by 1-1/2 steps.  Alternate fingerings may be used to improve facility in certain passages. Extending the third valve slide when using the fingerings 1-3 or 1-2-3 further lowers the pitch slightly to improve intonation.




One trumpet method publication of long-standing popularity is Jean-Baptiste Arban's Complete Conservatory Method for Trumpet (Cornet). Arban, Jean-Baptiste (1894, 1936, 1982).  Arban's Complete Conservatory Method for TRUMPET.  Carl Fischer, Inc.  ISBN 0-8258-0385-3.  Other well-known method books include "Technical Studies" by Herbert L. Clarke, Herbert L. Clarke (1984). Technical Studies for the Cornet,C. Carl Fischer, Inc. ISBN 0-8258-0158-3.  "Grand Method" by Louis Saint-Jacome, "Daily Drills and Technical Studies" by Max Schlossberg, and methods by Claude Gordon and Charles Colin. Colin, Charles. Advanced Lip Flexibilities.  Vassily Brandt's Orchestral Etudes and Last Etudes Vassily Brandt Orchestral Etudes and Last Etudes. ISBN 0-7692-9779-X  is used in many college and conservatory trumpet studios, containing drills on permutations of standard orchestral trumpet repertoire, transpositions, and other advanced material. A common method book for beginners is the "Walter Beeler Method", and there have been several instruction books written by virtuoso Allen Vizzutti. The Breeze Eazy'' method is sometimes used to teach younger students, as it includes general musical information.




Famous jazz trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie in 1988
The trumpet is used in many forms of music, though the most recognised players have been in the jazz field. Louis Armstrong, for example, was well known for his virtuosity with the trumpet. Armstrong's improvisations on his Hot Five and Hot Seven records were daring and sophisticated while also often subtle and melodic. Miles Davis is widely considered one of the most influential musicians of the 20th century. His trumpet playing was  distinctive, with a vocal, clear tone that has been imitated by many. The phrasing and sense of space in his solos have been models for generations of jazz musicians.

Dizzy Gillespie was a trumpet virtuoso and gifted improviser, building on the style of Roy Eldridge but adding new layers of harmonic complexity. Gillespie had an enormous impact on virtually every subsequent trumpeter, both by the example of his playing and as a mentor to younger musicians. Maynard Ferguson came to prominence playing in Stan Kenton's orchestra, before forming his own band in 1957. He was noted for being able to play accurately in a remarkably high register.    While he was not the first trumpeter to play in the extreme upper register, he had a unique ability to play high notes with full, rich tone, power, and musicality.  While regarded by some as showboating, Ferguson's tone, phrasing and vibrato was instantly recognizable and has been influential on and imitated by generations of amateur and professional trumpet players.  A direct connection to Ferguson's style of playing continues in the work of the trumpeters who played with him, notably Roger Ingram, Wayne Bergeron, and Eric Miyashiro.  Although some had believed that Ferguson was endowed with exceptional facial musculature, he often shared in interviews that his command of the upper registers was based mostly on breath control,    something he had discovered as a youngster in Montreal.

Among the other great modern jazz trumpet players are Clifford Brown, Jon Faddis, Harry James, Wynton Marsalis, Freddie Hubbard, Lee Morgan, Chet Baker,  Arturo Sandoval, Doc Severinsen and Don Cherry.

Notable classical trumpeters include Maurice André, Roger Voisin, Armando Ghitalla, William Vacchiano, Adolph "Bud" Herseth, Charles Schlueter, Malcolm McNab, Sergei Nakariakov, Maurice Murphy, Hakan Hardenberger, Philip Smith, Rafael Méndez and Wynton Marsalis.

A musician who plays the trumpet is called a trumpet player or trumpeter.




The trumpet is used in a wide range of musical styles including ska, ska punk, classical, jazz, Rock, Blues, pop, polka, cuban music, mariachi and funk.




The chromatic trumpet was first made in the late 1700s, but there were several solos written for the natural trumpet that are now played on piccolo trumpet; those old solos were of necessity high because the overtone series available to the natural trumpet only had stepwise notes at the top. Joseph Haydn's Trumpet Concerto was one of the first for a chromatic trumpet, Keith Anderson, liner notes for Naxos CD 8.550243, Famous Trumpet Concertos, "Haydn's concerto, written for Weidinger in 1796, must have startled contemporary audiences by its novelty. At the first performance of the new concerto in Vienna in 1800 a trumpet melody was heard in a lower register than had hitherto been practicable."  a fact shown off by some stepwise melodies played low in the instrument's range.



*List of trumpeters
*Muted trumpet
*Piccolo trumpet
*Gu%C4%8Da trumpet festival - The world's largest trumpet festival



*Don L. Smithers, The Music and History of the Baroque Trumpet Before 1721, Syracuse University Press, 1973, ISBN 0815621574
*Philip Bate, The Trumpet and Trombone: An Outline of Their History, Development, and Construction, Ernest Benn, 1978, ISBN 0393021297
*Roger Sherman, Trumpeter's Handbook: A Comprehensive Guide to Playing and Teaching the Trumpet, Accura Music, 1979, ISBN 0918194024
*Stan Skardinski, You Can't Be Timid With a Trumpet: Notes from the Orchestra, Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books, 1980, ISBN 0688419631
*Robert Barclay, The Art of the Trumpet-Maker: The Materials, Tools and Techniques of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries in Nuremberg , Oxford University Press, 1992, ISBN 0198162235
*James Arthur Brownlow, The Last Trumpet: A History of the English Slide Trumpet, Pendragon Press, 1996, ISBN 0945193815
*Frank Gabriel Campos, Trumpet Technique, Oxford University Press, 2005, ISBN 0195166922




* International Trumpet Guild international trumpet players' association with online library of scholarly journal back issues, news, jobs and other trumpet resources. 
* Jay Lichtmann's trumpet studies Scales and technical trumpet studies.
* Dallas Music — a non-profit musical instrument resource site

Drum

 
Bass drum made from wood, rope, and cowskin
The drum is a member of the percussion group, technically classified as a membranophone.  
 . Drums consist of at least one membrane, called a drumhead or drum skin, that is stretched over a shell and struck, either directly with parts of a player's body, or with some sort of implement such as a drumstick, to produce sound. Other techniques have been used to cause drums to make sound, such as the "Thumb roll".  Drums are the world's oldest and most ubiquitous musical instruments, and the basic design has remained virtually unchanged for thousands of years.  
  Most drums are considered "untuned instruments", however many modern musicians are beginning to tune drums to songs; Terry Bozzio has constructed a kit using diatonic and chromatically tuned drums. A few such as timpani are always tuned to a certain pitch. Often, several drums are arranged together to create a drum kit that can be played by one musician with all four limbs    .



The shell almost invariably has a circular opening over which the drumhead is stretched, but the shape of the remainder of the shell varies widely. In the western musical tradition, the most usual shape is a cylinder, although timpani, for example, use bowl-shaped shells . Other shapes include a frame design (tar, Bodhrán), truncated cones (bongo drums, Ashiko), goblet shaped (djembe), and joined truncated cones (talking drum),

Drums with cylindrical shells can be open at one end (as is the case with timbales), or can have two drum heads. Single-headed drums normally consist of a skin which is stretched over an enclosed space, or over one of the ends of a hollow vessel. Drums with two heads covering both ends of a cylindrical shell often have a small hole somewhat halfway between the two heads; the shell forms a resonating chamber for the resulting sound. Exceptions include the African slit drum, made from a hollowed-out tree trunk, and the Caribbean steel drum, made from a metal barrel. Drums with two heads can also have a set of wires, called snares, held across the bottom head, top head, or both heads, hence the name snare drum .

On modern band and orchestral drums, the drumhead is placed over the opening of the drum, which in turn is held onto the shell by a "counterhoop" (or "rim), which is then held by means of a number of tuning keyscrews called "tension rods" (also known as lugs) placed regularly around the circumference. The head's tension can be adjusted by loosening or tightening the rods. Many such drums have six to ten tension rods. The sound of a drum depends on several variables, including shape, size and thickness of its shell, materials from which the shell was made, counterhoop material, type of drumhead used and tension applied to it, position of the drum, location, and the velocity and angle in which it is struck.

Prior to the invention of tension rods drum skins were attached and tuned by rope systems such as that used on the Djembe or pegs and ropes such as that used on Ewe Drums, a system rarely used today, although sometimes seen on regimental marching band snare drums .
Drum carried by John Unger, Company B, 40th Regiment New York Veteran Volunteer Infantry Mozart Regiment, December 20, 1863



Several factors determine the sound a drum produces, including the type of shell the drum has, the type of drumheads it has, and the tension of the drumheads.  Different drum sounds have different uses in music. For example, a jazz drummer may want drums that sound crisp, clean, and a little on the soft side, whereas a rock and roll drummer may prefer drums that sound loud and deep. Because these drummers want different sounds, their drums will be constructed differently.

The drumhead has the most effect on how a drum sounds. Each type of drumhead serves its own musical purpose and has its own unique sound. Thicker drumheads are lower-pitched and can be very loud. Drumheads with a white plastic coating on them muffle the overtones of the drumhead slightly, producing a less diverse pitch.  Drumheads with central silver or black dots tend to muffle the overtones even more.  And drumheads with perimeter sound rings mostly eliminate overtones (Howie 2005). Some jazz drummers avoid using thick drumheads, preferring single ply drumheads or drumheads with no muffling.  Rock drummers often prefer the thicker or coated drumheads.

The second biggest factor affecting the sound produced by a drum is the tension at which the drumhead is held against the shell of the drum.  When the hoop is placed around the drumhead and shell and tightened down with bolts, the tension of the head can be adjusted. When the tension is increased, the amplitude of the sound is reduced  and the frequency is increased, making the pitch higher and the volume lower.

The type of shell also affects the sound of a drum. Because the vibrations resonate in the shell of the drum, the shell can be used to increase the volume and to manipulate the type of sound produced. The larger the diameter of the shell, the lower the pitch of the drum will be.  The type of wood is important as well. Birch generates a bright, crisp, and clean sound, maple reproduces the frequency of the drumhead as it resonates and has a warm, wholesome sound while mahogany raises the frequency of low pitches and keeps higher frequencies at about the same speed. When choosing a set of shells, a jazz drummer may want smaller maple shells, while a rock drummer may want larger birch shells. For more information about tuning drums or the physics of a drum, visit the external links listed below.



Drums are usually played by the hands, or by one or two sticks. In many traditional cultures drums have a symbolic function and are often used in religious ceremonies. Drums are often used in music therapy, especially hand drums, because of their tactile nature and easy use by a wide variety of people.

Within the realm of popular music and jazz, "drums" usually refers to a drum kit or a set of drums, and "drummer" to the actual band member or person who plays them.



Moche ceramic vessel depicting a drummer. Larco Museum Collection. Lima-Peru 
In the past drums have been used not only for their musical qualities, but also as a means of communication, especially through signals. The talking drums of Africa can imitate the inflections and pitch variations of a spoken language and are used for communicating over great distances. Throughout Sri Lankan history drums have been used for communication between the state and the community, and Sri Lankan drums have a history stretching back over 2500 years. Chinese troops used tàigǔ drums to motivate troops, to help set a marching pace, and to call out orders or announcements . Fife-and-drum corps of Swiss mercenary foot soldiers also used drums. They used an early version of the snare drum carried over the player's right shoulder, suspended by a strap (typically played with one hand using traditional grip). It is to this instrument that English word "drum" was first used. Similarly, during the English civil war rope-tension drums would be carried by junior officers as a means to relay commands from senior officers over the noise of battle. These were also hung over the shoulder of the drummer and typically played with two drum sticks. Different regiments and companies would have distinctive and unique drum beats which only they would recognize.




Handscroll detail of a Chinese percussionist playing a drum for a dancing woman, from a 12th century remake of Gu Hongzhong's 10th century original, Song Dynasty.
* Aburukuwa
* Ashiko
* bass drums
* Bodhrán
* bongo drums
* Bougarabou
* Five gallon buckets
* Cajón
* Cocktail drum
* Chenda
* Conga

* Darbuka
* Davul
* Damphu
* Dhak
* Dhimay
* Dhol
* Dholak
* Djembe
* Dong Son drum
* Drum kit
* Ewe Drums
* Goblet drum
* Hand drum
* Kpanlogo
* Log drum
* Madal

* Mridangam
* side drum (Marching snare drum)
* Slit drum
* Snare drum
* Steelpan (steel drum)
* Tabor
* Tambourine
* Taiko
* Tabla
* Talking drum
* Tapan
* Tar
* Tavil
* Tenor drums
* Timbales
* Timpani
* Tom-tom drum




* Blast beat
* Double drumming
* Drum beat
* Drum circle
* Drum kit
* Drumline
* Drum machine
* Drum replacement
* Drummer

* Vibrations of a circular drum
* Hearing the shape of a drum
* Gallop
* List of drummers
* Musical instrument
* Practice pad
* Percussive Arts Society
* Drumsticks
* Electronic drum

Several American Indian-style drums for sale at the National Museum of the American Indian.




*Howie. 2005.  Tuning. Retrieved on: April 22, 2005. 
*Johnson. 1999.  Drum Woods. Retrieved on: April 22, 2005.




*  WikiRecording's Guide to Recording Drums
*  411Drums: Drums Lessons, Drum Tabs, Drum History, Drum Tips & more


Flute

 
A picture of a Western concert flute

The flute is a musical instrument of the woodwind family. Unlike other woodwind instruments, a flute is a reedless wind instrument that produces its sound from the flow of air against an edge.

A musician who plays the flute can be referred to as a flute player, a flautist, or a flutist.




The flute has been dated to prehistoric times. It has appeared in different forms and locations around the world. A three-holed flute made from a mammoth tusk (from the Geißenklösterle cave in the German Swabian Alb and dated to 30,000 to 37,000 years ago   ) was discovered in 2004, and two flutes made from swans' bones excavated a decade earlier (from the same cave in Germany, dated to circa 36,000 years ago) are among the oldest known musical instruments. A fragment of the femur of a juvenile cave bear, with two to four holes, found at Divje Babe in Slovenia and dated to about 43,100 years ago, may also be an early flute.     Flute History, UCLA. Retrieved June 2007.  
The Bible, in Genesis 4:21, cites Jubal as being the "father of all those who play the ugab and the kinnor". The former Hebrew term refers to some wind instrument, or wind instruments in general, the latter to a stringed instrument, or stringed instruments in general. As such, Jubal is traditionally regarded as the inventor of the flute (a word used in some translations of this biblical passage). Some early flutes were made out of tibias (shin bones). The flute has also always been an essential part of Indian culture and mythology,    and the cross flute believed by several accounts to originate in India       as Indian literature from 1500 BCE has made vague references to the cross flute.

Playable 9000-year-old Gudi (literally, "bone flute"), made from the wing bones of red-crowned cranes, with five to eight holes each, were excavated from a tomb in Jiahu  The bone age flute. BBC. Retrieved July 2007.  in the Central Chinese province of Henan.

The earliest extant transverse flute is a chi (篪) flute discovered in the Tomb of Marquis Yi of Zeng at the Suizhou site, Hubei province, China. It dates from 433 BC, of the later Zhou Dynasty. It is fashioned of lacquered bamboo with closed ends and has five stops that are at the flute's side instead of the top. Chi flutes are mentioned in Shi Jing, compiled and edited by Confucius.




The pan flute was used in Greece from the 7th century BC, and spread to other parts of Europe.  A Worldwide History of the Pan Flute   Throughout the 10th, 12th and 13th centuries, transverse flutes were very uncommon in Europe, with the various fipple flutes being more prominent. The tin whistle (an Irish flute) first appeared in the 12th century, and the recorder in the 14th century. The first literary appearance of the transverse flute was made in 1285, but early on the instrument was only used in Germany and France.

Following the 16th-century court music, concert flutes began appearing in chamber ensembles. These flutes were often tuned to the key of D, and used as the tenor voice. However, these flutes varied greatly in size and range. The recorder continued to be popular during the renaissance, but its use declined in the 18th century. The later half of the 18th century shows the first orchestras being formed, and the concert flute being a member thereof, featured in symphonies and concertos. Throughout the rest of the 18th century the interest in concert flutes increased, and peaked in the early half of the 1800s.
In the 19th century, the ocarina was developed from the gemshorn, an instrument from the 16th century.

The 20th century saw a revival of the recorder, while the concert flute and tin whistle continued to be popular. The invention of plastics in the 20th century gave birth to the tonette, a fipple flute used in music education, but it soon fell out of use, replaced by plastic recorders.



A flute produces sound when a stream of air directed across a hole in the instrument creates a vibration of air at the hole.  Flute acoustics, UNSW. Retrieved June 2007.

The air stream across this hole creates a Bernoulli, or siphon, effect leading to a von Karman vortex street. This excites the air contained in the usually cylindrical resonant cavity within the flute. The player changes the pitch of the sound produced by opening and closing holes in the body of the instrument, thus changing the effective length of the resonator and its corresponding resonant frequency. By varying the air pressure, a flute player can also change the pitch of a note by causing the air in the flute to resonate at a harmonic other than the fundamental frequency without opening or closing any holes.

To be louder, a flute must use a larger resonator, a larger air stream, or increased air stream velocity. A flute's volume can generally be increased by making its resonator and tone holes larger. This is why a police whistle, a form of flute, is very wide for its pitch, and why a pipe organ can be far louder than a concert flute: a large organ pipe can contain several cubic feet of air, and its tone hole may be several inches wide, while a concert flute's air stream measures a fraction of an inch across.

The air stream must be directed at the correct angle and velocity, or else the air in the flute will not vibrate. In fippled or ducted flutes, a precisely formed and placed windway will compress and channel the air to the labium ramp edge across the open window. In the organ, this air is supplied by a regulated blower.

In non-fipple flutes, the air stream is shaped and directed by the player's lips, called the embouchure. This allows the player a wide range of expression in pitch, volume, and timbre, especially in comparison to fipple/ducted flutes. However, it also makes an end blown flute or transverse flute considerably more difficult for a beginner to produce a full sound than a ducted flute, such as the recorder. Transverse and end-blown flutes also take more air to play, which requires deeper breathing and makes circular breathing a considerably trickier proposition.

Generally, the quality called timbre or "tone colour" varies because the flute can produce harmonics in different proportions or intensities. The tone color can be modified by changing the internal shape of the bore, such as the conical taper, or the diameter-to-length ratio. A harmonic is a frequency that is a whole number multiple of a lower register, or "fundamental" note of the flute. Generally the air stream is thinner (vibrating in more modes), faster (providing more energy to excite the air's resonance), and aimed across the hole less deeply (permitting a more shallow deflection of the air stream) in the production of higher harmonics or upper partials.

Head joint geometry appears particularly critical to acoustic performance and tone,     but there is no clear consensus on a particular shape amongst manufacturers. Acoustic impedance of the embouchure hole appears the most critical parameter.    Critical variables affecting this acoustic impedance include: chimney length (hole between lip-plate and head tube), chimney diameter, and radiuses or curvature of the ends of the chimney and any designed restriction in the "throat" of the instrument, such as that in the Japanese Nohkan Flute.

A study in which professional players were blindfolded could find no significant differences between instruments made from a variety of different metals.    In two different sets of blind listening, no instrument was correctly identified in a first listening, and in a second, only the silver instrument was identified. The study concluded that there was "no evidence that the wall material has any appreciable effect on the sound color or dynamic range of the instrument". Unfortunately, this study did not control for headjoint design, which is generally known to affect tone (see above). Controlled tone tests show that the tube mass does make a difference and therefore tube density and wall thickness will make a difference.    One must also consider the inefficiency of the human ear to detect sound, vs electronic sensors.



Playing the zampoña, a Pre-Inca instrument and type of pan flute.
In its most basic form, a flute can be an open tube which is blown like a bottle. There are several broad classes of flutes. With most flutes, the musician blows directly across the edge of the mouthpiece. However, some flutes, such as the whistle, gemshorn, flageolet, recorder, tin whistle, tonette, fujara, and ocarina have a duct that directs the air onto the edge (an arrangement that is termed a "fipple"). These are known as fipple flutes. The fipple gives the instrument a distinct timbre which is different from non-fipple flutes and makes the instrument easier to play, but takes a degree of control away from the musician.

Another division is between side-blown (or transverse) flutes, such as the Western concert flute, piccolo, fife, dizi, and bansuri; and end-blown flutes, such as the ney, xiao, kaval, danso, shakuhachi, Anasazi flute, and quena. The player of a side-blown flute uses a hole on the side of the tube to produce a tone, instead of blowing on an end of the tube. End-blown flutes should not be confused with fipple flutes such as the recorder, which are also played vertically but have an internal duct to direct the air flow across the edge of the tone hole.

Flutes may be open at one or both ends. The ocarina, pan pipes, police whistle, and bosun's whistle are closed-ended. Open-ended flutes such as the concert flute and the recorder have more harmonics, and thus more flexibility for the player, and brighter timbres. An organ pipe may be either open or closed, depending on the sound desired.

Flutes can be played with several different air sources. Conventional flutes are blown with the mouth, although some cultures use nose flutes. The Flue pipes of Organs, which are acoustically similar to duct flutes, are blown by bellows or fans.




An illustration of a Western concert flute

The Western concert flute, a descendant of the 19th-century German flute, is a transverse flute which is closed at the top. Near the top is the embouchure hole, across and into which the player blows. It has larger circular finger-holes than its baroque predecessors, designed to increase the instrument's dynamic range. Various combinations can be opened or closed by means of keys, to produce the different notes in its playing range. There are a total of 25 working keys on a western concert flute. The note produced depends on which finger-holes are opened or closed and on how the flute is blown. There are two kinds of foot joints available for the concert flute: the standard C foot (shown above) or the longer B foot with an extra key extending the flute's range to B below middle C. There can also be a Bb below middle c foot joint added to the instrument. With the rare exception of the Kingma system, or custom-devised fingering systems, modern Western concert flutes conform to the Boehm system.

The standard concert flute is pitched in the key of C and has a range of three octaves starting from middle C (or one half-step lower with a B foot). This means that the concert flute is one of the highest common orchestral instruments, with the exception of the piccolo, which plays an octave higher. G alto and C bass flutes, pitched, respectively, a perfect fourth and an octave below the concert flute, are used occasionally. Parts are written for alto flute more frequently than for bass. The contrabass, double contrabass, and hyperbass are other rare forms of the flute pitched two, three, and four octaves below middle C respectively.

Other sizes of flute and piccolo are used from time to time. A rarer instrument of the modern pitching system is the treble G flute. Instruments made according to an older pitch standard, used principally in wind-band music, include Db piccolo, Eb soprano flute (the primary instrument, equivalent to today's concert C flute), F alto flute, and Bb bass flute.



Photograph of an 8-holed bamboo flute
A bansuri being played by an Indian classical music artist.
The bamboo flute is an important instrument in Indian classical music, and developed independently of the Western flute. The Hindu god Krishna is traditionally considered a master of the Bansuri (see below). The Indian flutes are very simple compared to the Western counterparts; they are made of bamboo and are keyless.

Pannalal Ghosh, a legendary Indian flutist, was the first to transform a tiny folk instrument to a bamboo flute (32 inches long with seven finger holes) suitable for playing traditional Indian classical music, and also to bring to it the stature of other classical music instruments. The extra hole permitted madhyam to be played, which facilitates the meends (like M N, P M and M D) in several traditional ragas.

Indian concert flutes are available in standard pitches. In Carnatic Music, the pitches are referred by numbers such as (assuming C as the tonic) 1 (for C), 1-1/2 (C#), 2 (D), 2-1/2 (D#), 3 (E), 4 (F), 4-1/2 (F#), 5 (G), 5-1/2 (G#), 6 (A), 6-1/2 (A#) and 7 (B). However, the pitch of a composition is itself not fixed and hence any of the flutes may be used for the concert (as long as the accompanying instruments, if any, are tuned appropriately) and is largely left to the personal preference of the artist.

Various type of flutes being sold by a boy in a local market in Bangalore, India
Two main varieties of Indian flutes are currently used. The first, the Bansuri, has six finger holes and one embouchure hole, and is used predominantly in the Hindustani music of Northern India. The second, the Venu or Pullanguzhal, has eight finger holes, and is played predominantly in the Carnatic music of Southern India. Presently, the 8-holed flute with cross-fingering technique is common among many Carnatic flutists. This technique was introduced by T. R. Mahalingam in the mid-20th century. Prior to this, the South Indian flute had only seven finger holes, with the fingering standard developed by Sharaba Shastri, of the Palladam school, at the beginning of the 20th century.    In 1998, based on his research on Bharata Natya Shastra's Sarana Chatushtai, Avinash Balkrishna Patwardhan developed a methodology to produce perfectly tuned flutes for the ten thatas currently present in Indian classical music.

The quality of the flute's sound depends somewhat on the specific bamboo used to make it, and it is generally agreed that the best bamboo grows in the Nagarcoil area in South India.



The Japanese flute, called the Fue, encompasses a large number of musical flutes from Japan.



The sring (also called blul) is a relatively small, end-blown flute with a nasal tone quality Pahlevanian 2001  and the pitch of a piccolo,  found in the Caucasus region of Eastern Armenia. It is made of wood or cane, usually with seven finger holes and one thumb hole,  producing a diatonic scale. The sring is used by shepherds to play various signals and tunes connected with their work, and also lyrical love songs called chaban bayaty, as well as programmatic pieces.  The sring is also used in combination with the def and the dohl to provide music for dancing.  One Armenian musicologist believes the sring to be the most characteristic of national Armenian instruments. Komitas 1994



*Diple
*Duduk
*Irish flute
*Palendag
*Pipe and tabor
*Tin whistle
*Tumpong
*Washint



*Fleadh Cheoil (Irish competition)
*Trill



*Boehm, Theobald. 1964. The Flute and Flute-Playing in Acoustical, Technical, and Artistic Aspects, translated by Dayton C. Miller, with a new introduction by Samuel Baron. New York: Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-21259-9
*Buchanan, Donna A. 2001. “Bulgaria §II: Traditional Music, 2: Characteristics of Pre-Socialist Musical Culture, 1800–1944, (iii): Instruments”. The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. S. Sadie and J. Tyrrell. London: Macmillan.
*Crane, Frederick. 1972. Extant Medieval Musical Instruments: A Provisional Catalogue by Types. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. ISBN 0-87745-022-6
*Galway, James. 1982. Flute. Yehudi Menuhin Music Guides. London: Macdonald. ISBN 0356047113 (cloth); ISBN 0356047121 (pbk.) New York: Schirmer Books. ISBN 002871380X Reprinted 1990, London: Kahn & Averill London: Khan & Averill ISBN 1871082137
*Komitas, Vardapet. 1994. Grakan nshkhark' Komitas Vardapeti beghun grch'ēn: npast mē Komitas Vardapeti srbadasman harts'in, edited by Abel Oghlukian. Montreal: Ganatahayots' Aṛajnordarani "K'ristonēakan Usman ew Astuatsabanut'ean Kedron".
*Pahlevanian, Alina. 2001. “Armenia §I: Folk Music, 3: Epics”. The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. S. Sadie and J. Tyrrell. London: Macmillan.
*Phelan, James, The Complete Guide to the Flute and Piccolo (Burkart-Phelan, Inc., 2004)
*Putnik, Edwin. 1970. The Art of Flute Playing. Evanston, Illinois: Summy-Birchard Inc. Revised edition 1973, Princeton, New Jersey and Evanston, Illinois. ISBN 0874870771
*Toff, Nancy. 1985. The Flute Book: A Complete Guide for Students and Performers. New York: Charles's Scribners Sons. ISBN 0684182416 Newton Abbot: David & Charles. ISBN 0715387715 Second Edition 1996, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195105028
*Wye, Trevor. 1988. Proper Flute Playing: A Companion to the Practice Books. London: Novello. ISBN 0711984654




* FluteInfo Contains fingering charts, performance articles, free sheet music and other musical information.
* Thai Flute Khlui
* Sources for the prescribed sheet music for the ABRSM practical flute exams
* Access to IMSLP: 12 collections totaling 1000 free downloadable flute/recorder solos with historical notes
*  Chiff & Fipple: Very large website devoted to tin whistles
*  Chiffboard: Large and busy forums on flutes, tin whistles and related folk instruments
* Vidly.net This video shows how a flute is manufactured.

* The Dayton C. Miller Flute Collection has many pictures of flutes through the ages, among other useful information.
* FluteHistory.com
* Larry Krantz Flute Pages Wide range of flute related information contributed by many professional flute players. Access to information about flute - email discussion group.
* Flautistico.com Flute related content in Spanish.
* Jennifer Cluff flute articles Extensive list of articles on hard-to-find flute topics.
* The Woodwind Fingering Guide - A large, easy-to-navigate listing of flute fingerings
* The Virtual Flute An easy to search database of Boehm flute alternate fingering and multiphonic fingering - An extensive work by the School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney Australia
* Indian Flutes
* Photo of a Pinkillo.
* * * *  
* * Ikonographie der Renaissanceflöte / Renaissance Flute Iconography
* Interactive Indian Classical Bansuri Fingering Chart
* Download Bansuri Fingering Chart
* Interactive Flute Fingering Trainer

Cymbal



Cymbals are a modern percussion instrument. Cymbals consist of thin, normally round plates of various cymbal alloys; see cymbal making for a discussion of their manufacture. Most modern cymbals are of indefinite pitch (tuned sets have been manufactured but are rare), whereas small cup-shaped cymbals based on ancient designs sound a definite note (''see: crotales).

Cymbals are used in modern orchestras and many military, marching, concert and other bands. They are one of the two instrument types that form the modern drum kit, the other being the drum, and are a basic part of much contemporary music. The most basic drum kit normally contains at least one suspended cymbal and a pair of hi-hat cymbals.



The origins of cymbals can be traced back to prehistoric times. The ancient Egyptian cymbals closely resembled our own. The British Museum possesses two pairs, thirteen centimetres in diameter, one of which was found in the coffin of the mummy of Ankhhape, a sacred musician. Those used by the Assyrians were both plate- and cup-shaped, those of the Ancient Persians large-sized plates, made of brass, known as Sanj. The Greek cymbals were cup- or bell-shaped, and may be seen in the hands of innumerable fauns and satyrs in sculptures and on painted vases. The word cymbal is derived from the Latin cymbalum, which itself derives from the Greek word kumbalom, meaning a small bowl.



* Bell- The center of a Cymbal. When hit with the side or shoulder of a drum stick, it causes a sound which is in a higher register than the rest of the cymbal. 
* Bow- The remaining surface of the Cymbal. This is where you get a "ping" sound. 
* Edge or rim- This is where you get the best "crash". Hitting the edge causes the cymbal to vibrate more, thus being louder.



The most common Cymbals are the Hi-Hats, Crash, Splash, Ride, and China.



Although cymbals are not often required they form part of every orchestra; their chief use is for marking the rhythm, producing effects, or adding military color.  Their unique timbre allows them to project even against a full orchestra and through the heaviest of orhestrations. Cymbals have been utilized historically to suggest frenzy, fury or bacchanalian revels, as seen in the Venus music in Wagner's Tannhäuser, Grieg's Peer Gynt suite, and Osmin's aria "O wie will ich triumphieren" from Mozart's Die Entführung aus dem Serail.



A pair of clash cymbals in profile. The bell is in green and the straps are in red.

Orchestral crash cymbals are traditionally used in pairs, each one having a strap set in the bell of the cymbal by which they are held. Such a pair is known technically as a pair of clash cymbals, although this term is rarely used, see clash cymbals. They are confusingly sometimes referred to simply as crash cymbals, although this term properly applies also to some suspended cymbals.

The sound can be obtained by rubbing their edges together in a sliding movement  for a "sizzle", striking them against each other in what is called a "crash", tapping the edge of one against the body of the other in what is called a "tap-crash", scraping the edge of one from the inside of the bell to the edge for a "scrape" or "zishend," or shutting the cymbals together and choking the sound in what is called a "hi-hat chick." A skilled player can obtain an enormous dynamic range from such a pair of cymbals. For example, in Beethoven's ninth symphony, one of their first appearances in an orchestral work, they make their entry pianissimo, adding a touch of colour rather than an almighty crash.

Clash cymbals are usually damped by pressing them against the player's body. A composer may write laissez vibrer, "Let vibrate" (usually abbreviated l.v.), secco (dry), or equivalent indications on the score; more usually, the player must judge exactly when to damp the cymbals based on the written duration of crash and the context in which it occurs.

Clash cymbals have traditionally been accompanied by the bass drum playing an identical part. This combination, played loudly, is an effective way to accentuate a note since the two instruments together contribute to both very low and very high frequency ranges and provide a satisfying "crash-bang-wallop". In older music the composer sometimes provided just one part for this pair of instruments, writing senza piatti or piatti soli (Italian: "without cymbals" or "cymbals only") if the bass drum is to remain silent. However, the modern convention is for the instruments to have independent parts.

Clash cymbals evolved into the low-sock and from this to the modern hi-hat. Even in a modern drum kit, they remain paired with the bass drum as the two instruments which are played with the player's feet. However, hi-hat cymbals tend to be heavy with little taper, more similar to a ride cymbal than to a crash cymbal as found in a drum kit, and perform a ride rather than a crash function.


 
The second main orchestral use of cymbals is the suspended cymbal. This instrument takes its name from the traditional method of suspending the cymbal by means of a leather strap or rope, thus allowing the cymbal to vibrate as freely as possible for maximum musical effect. Early jazz drumming pioneers borrowed this style of cymbal mounting during the early 1900s and later drummers further developed this instrument in to the mounted horizontal or nearly horizontally mounted "crash" cymbals of a modern drum kit.

Suspended cymbals are most often played with yarn wrapped mallets. However, some composers request other types of mallets like felt mallets or timpani beaters for different attack and sustain qualities. Suspended cymbals can produce bright and slicing tones when forcefully struck, and give an eerie transparent "windy" sound when played quietly. A tremolo, or roll (played with two mallets alternately striking on opposing sides of the cymbal) can build in volume from almost inaudible to an overwhelming climax in a satisfyingly smooth manner (as in Humperdink's Mother Goose Suite).

Furthermore, the edge of a suspended cymbal may be hit with shoulder of a drum stick to obtain a sound somewhat akin to that of a pair of clash cymbals. Other methods of playing include scraping a coin or a triangle beater rapidly across the ridges on the top of the cymbal, giving a "zing" sound (as in the fourth movement of Dvořák's Symphony No. 9). Other effects that can be used include drawing a cello or bass bow across the edge of the cymbal for a sound not unlike squealing car brakes.

On another note, in highschool marching bands, a "pit" may use a suspended cymbal for a song. This is held on a tree-like structure, similar to how it would be placed by a drumset. Also known as a high-top, the instrument's music will read it as a "sus. cym. or cymb."



Ancient cymbals or tuned cymbals are much more rarely called for. Their timbre is entirely different, more like that of small hand-bells or of the notes of the keyed harmonica. They are not struck full against each other, but by one of their edges, and the note given in by them is higher in proportion as they are thicker and smaller. Berlioz's Romeo and Juliet calls for two pairs of cymbals, modelled on some old Pompeian instruments no larger than the hand (some are no larger than a crown piece), and tuned to F and B flat. The modern instruments descended from this line are the crotales.




* China cymbals
* crash cymbals
* hi-hat cymbals
* Persian cymbals
* ride cymbals
* Swish and pang cymbals
* Sizzle cymbals
* Splash cymbals
* Trash Hats (Hi-Hat cymbal / china cymbal hybrid setup)



* Clash cymbals
* Finger cymbals - Zill
* Suspended cymbals



*Cymbal alloys
*Cymbal making
*Drum
*Drum kit
*Percussion instrument




*Avedis Zildjian Company
*Saluda Cymbals
*Italian Bellotti Cymbals
*Agean Cymbals
*Bosphorus Cymbals
*Meinl
*Paiste
*Sabian
*Stagg
*UFIP
*Yamaha
*Wuhan
*Istanbul cymbals
*Istanbul Agop
*Turk Masters Cymbals

:See also .




* CymbalPlanet.com Welcome to the World of Cymbals
* Accessory Fetish A Complete List of Cymbal Manufacturers
* Cymbal Forum Discussion forum about cymbals.
* Orchestral cymbal playing, with an excellent short history of cymbals


Guitar



The guitar is a musical instrument with ancient roots that is used in a wide variety of musical styles. It typically has six strings, but four, seven, eight,  ten and twelve string guitars also exist.

Guitars are recognized as one of the primary instruments in blues, country, flamenco, rock music, and many forms of pop. They can also be a solo classical instrument. Guitars may be played acoustically, where the tone is produced by vibration of the strings and modulated by the hollow body, or they may rely on an amplifier that can electronically manipulate tone. Such electric guitars were introduced in the 20th century and continue to have a profound influence on popular culture.

Traditionally guitars have usually been constructed of combinations of various woods and strung with animal gut, or more recently, with either nylon or steel strings. Guitars are made and repaired by luthiers.



Before the development of the electric guitar and the use of synthetic materials, a guitar was defined as being an instrument having "a long, fretted neck, flat wooden soundboard, ribs, and a flat back, most often with incurved sides". Kasha, Dr. Michael (August 1968). "A New Look at The History of the Classic Guitar". Guitar Review 30,3-12  Instruments similar to the guitar have been popular for at least 5,000 years. The six string  classical guitar first appeared in Spain but was itself the product of a long and complex history of diverse influences. Like virtually all other stringed European instruments, the guitar ultimately traces back thousands of years, via the Near East, to a common ancient origin from instruments then known in central Asia and India. It is distantly related with contemporary instruments such as the tanbur, setar, and the Indian sitar. The oldest known iconographic representation of an instrument displaying all the essential features of a guitar being played is a 3,300 year old stone carving of a Hittite bard. [A Brief History of the Guitar    The modern word, guitar, was adopted into English from Spanish guitarra (German Gitarre, French Guitare),    loaned from the Andalusian Arabic qitara    and Latin cithara, which in turn was derived from the earlier Greek word kithara, Kithara appears in the Greek New Testament four times (1 Cor. 14:7, Rev. 5:8, 14:2 and 15:2), and is usually translated into English as harp. Strong's Concordance Number:   2788    which is related to Old Persian sihtar.

Illustration from a Carolingian Psalter from the 9th century, showing a guitar-like plucked instrument.

The modern guitar is descended from the Roman cithara brought by the Romans to Hispania around 40 AD, and further adapted and developed with the arrival of the four-string oud, brought by the Moors after their conquest of the Iberian peninsula in the 8th century. Summerfield, Maurice J. (2003). The Classical Guitar, It's Evolution, Players and Personalities since 1800 (5th ed.) Blaydon on Tyne: Ashley Mark Publishing. ISBN 1-872-63946-1.  Elsewhere in Europe, the indigenous six-string Scandinavian lut (lute), had gained in popularity in areas of Viking incursions across the continent. Often depicted in carvings c. 800 AD, the Norse hero Gunther (also known as Gunnar), played a lute with his toes as he lay dying in a snake-pit, in the legend of Siegfried. [Viking Art & Architecture    By 1200 AD, the four string "guitar" had evolved into two types: the   (Moorish guitar) which had a rounded back, wide fingerboard and several soundholes, and the   (Latin guitar) which resembled the modern guitar with one soundhole and a narrower neck. [A Look At The History Of The Guitar

The Spanish vihuela or " ", a guitar-like instrument of the 15th and 16th centuries is, due to its many similarities, usually considered the immediate ancestor of the modern guitar. It had lute-style tuning and a guitar-like body. Its construction had as much in common with the modern guitar as with its contemporary four-course renaissance guitar. The vihuela enjoyed only a short period of popularity as it was superseded by the guitar; the last surviving publication of music for the instrument appeared in 1576. It is not clear whether it represented a transitional form or was simply a design that combined features of the Arabic oud and the European lute. In favor of the latter view, the reshaping of the vihuela into a guitar-like form can be seen as a strategy of differentiating the European lute visually from the Moorish oud.

The Vinaccia family of luthiers is known for developing the mandolin, and may have built the oldest surviving six string guitar. Gaetano Vinaccia (1759 – after 1831) The Classical Mandolin by Paul Sparks (1995)  has his signature on the label of a guitar built in Naples, Italy for six strings with the date of 1779.  Early Romantic Guitar  The Guitar and Its Music: From the Renaissance to the Classical Era by James Tyler (2002)  This guitar has been examined and does not show tell-tale signs of modifications from a double-course guitar although fakes are known to exist of guitars and identifying labels from that period.

The dimensions of the modern classical guitar (also known as the Spanish guitar) were established by Antonio Torres Jurado (1817-1892), working in Seville in the 1850s. Torres and Louis Panormo of London (active 1820s-1840s) were both responsible for demonstrating the superiority of fan strutting over transverse table bracing.



The guitar player (c. 1672), by Johannes Vermeer
Guitars can be divided into two broad categories, acoustic and electric:




An acoustic guitar is one not dependent on an external device to be heard but uses a soundboard which is a wooden piece mounted on the front of the guitar's body. The acoustic guitar is quieter than other instruments commonly found in bands and orchestras so when playing within such groups it is often externally amplified. Many acoustic guitars available today feature a variety of pickups which enable the player to amplify and modify the raw guitar sound.

There are several notable subcategories within the acoustic guitar group: classical and flamenco guitars; steel string guitars, which include the flat top or "folk" guitar; twelve string guitars and the arch top guitar. The acoustic guitar group also includes unamplified guitars designed to play in different registers such as the acoustic bass guitar which has a similar tuning to that of the electric bass guitar.

;Renaissance and Baroque guitars: These are the gracile ancestors of the modern classical guitar. They are substantially smaller and more delicate than the classical guitar, and generate a much quieter sound. The strings are paired in courses as in a modern 12 string guitar, but they only have four or five courses of strings rather than six. They were more often used as rhythm instruments in ensembles than as solo instruments, and can often be seen in that role in early music performances. (Gaspar Sanz' Instrucción de Música sobre la Guitarra Española of 1674 constitutes the majority of the surviving solo corpus for the era.) Renaissance and Baroque guitars are easily distinguished because the Renaissance guitar is very plain and the Baroque guitar is very ornate, with ivory or wood inlays all over the neck and body, and a paper-cutout inverted "wedding cake" inside the hole.

;Classical guitars: These are typically strung with nylon strings, played in a seated position and are used to play a diversity of musical styles including classical music. The classical guitar's wide, flat neck allows the musician to play scales, arpeggios and certain chord forms more easily and with less adjacent string interference than on other styles of guitar. Flamenco guitars are very similar in construction, but are associated with a more percussive tone. In Mexico, the popular mariachi band includes a range of guitars, from the tiny requinto to the guitarron, a guitar larger than a cello, which is tuned in the bass register. In Colombia, the traditional quartet includes a range of instruments too, from the small bandola (sometimes known as the Deleuze-Guattari, for use when traveling or in confined rooms or spaces), to the slightly larger tiple, to the full sized classical guitar. The requinto also appears in other Latin-American countries as a complementary member of the guitar family, with its smaller size and scale, permitting more projection for the playing of single-lined melodies. Modern dimensions of the classical instrument were established by Antonio Torres Jurado (1817-1892). Classical guitars are sometimes referred to as classic guitars. In recent years, the series of guitars used by the Niibori Guitar orchestra have gained some currency, namely:
;* Sopranino guitar (an octave and a fifth higher than normal); sometimes known as the piccolo guitar
;* Soprano guitar (an octave higher than normal)
;* Alto guitar (a 5th higher than normal)
;* Prime (ordinary classical) guitar
;* Niibori bass guitar (a 4th lower than normal); Niibori simply calls this the "bass guitar", but this assigns a different meaning to the term than other parts of the community use, as his is only a 4th lower, and has 6 strings
;* Contrabass guitar (an octave lower than normal)

;The modern Ten-string guitar:
The Modern/Yepes 10-string guitar (a classical guitar) adds four strings (resonators) tuned in such a way that they (along with the other three bass strings) can resonate in unison with any of the 12 chromatic notes that can occur on the higher strings; the idea behind this being an attempt at enhancing and balancing sonority.

;Portuguese guitar:
In spite of the name, it is not a guitar, but rather a cittern.

;Flat-top (steel-string) guitars: Similar to the classical guitar, however, within the varied sizes of the steel-stringed guitar the body size is usually significantly larger than a classical guitar and it has a narrower, reinforced neck and stronger structural design. This allows the instrument to withstand the additional tension of steel strings. The steel strings produce a brighter tone, and according to many players, a louder sound. The acoustic guitar is used in many kinds of music including folk, country, bluegrass, pop, jazz and blues.

;Archtop guitars: These are steel string instruments in which the top (and often the back) of the instrument are carved in a curved rather than a flat shape. Lloyd Loar of the Gibson Guitar Corporation introduced the violin-inspired f-hole design now usually associated with archtop guitars, after designing a style of mandolin of the same type. The typical archtop is a deep, hollow body guitar whose form is much like that of a mandolin or violin family instrument. Nowadays, most archtops are equipped with magnetic pickups and are therefore both acoustic and electric. F-hole archtop guitars were immediately adopted upon their release by both jazz and country musicians and have remained particularly popular in jazz music, usually with flatwound strings.

Ellis 8 string baritone tricone resonator guitar.
;Resonator, resophonic or Dobro guitars: Similar to the flat top guitar in appearance, the sound of the resonator guitar is produced by a metal resonator mounted in the middle of the top. The physical principle of the guitar is therefore similar to the banjo. The original purpose of the resonator was to amplify the sound of the guitar. This purpose has been largely superseded by electrical amplification, but the resonator guitar is still played because of its distinctive sound. Resonator guitars may have either one resonator cone or three resonator cones. Three-cone resonators have two cones on the left above one another and one cone immediately to the right. The method of transmitting sound resonance to the cone is either a "biscuit" bridge, made of a small piece of hardwood, or a "spider" bridge, made of metal and larger in size. Three-cone resonators always use a specialized metal spider bridge. The type of resonator guitar with a neck with a square cross-section – called "square neck" – is usually played face up, on the lap of the seated player, and often with a metal or glass slide. The round neck resonator guitars are normally played in the same fashion as other guitars, although slides are also often used, especially in blues.

;12 string guitars: The twelve string guitar usually has steel strings and is widely used in folk music, blues and rock and roll. Rather than having only six strings, the 12-string guitar has six courses made up of two strings each, like a mandolin or lute. The highest two courses are tuned in unison, while the others are tuned in octaves. The 12-string guitar is also made in electric forms.

;Russian guitars: These are seven string acoustic guitars which were the norm for Russian guitarists throughout the 19th and well into the 20th centuries. The guitar is traditionally tuned to an open G major tuning.

;Acoustic bass guitars: Have steel strings or gut strings and often the same tuning as an electric bass guitar.

;Tenor guitars: A number of classical guitarists call the Niibori prime guitar a "Tenor Guitar" on the grounds that it sits in pitch between the alto and the bass. Elsewhere  the name is taken for a 4-string guitar with a scale length of 23" (585 mm) – about the same as a Terz Guitar. The tenor guitar is tuned in fifths, C G D A, as is the tenor banjo and the cello. It is generally accepted   that the tenor guitar was created to allow a tenor banjo player to follow the fashion as it evolved from Dixieland Jazz towards the more progressive Jazz that featured guitar. It allows a tenor banjo player to provide a guitar-based rhythm section with little to learn. A small minority of players (such as Nick Reynolds of the Kingston Trio) close tuned the instrument to D G B E to produce a deep instrument that could be played with the 4-note chord shapes found on the top 4 strings of the guitar or ukulele. The deep pitch warrants the wide-spaced chords that the banjo tuning permits, and the close tuned tenor does not have the same full, clear sound.

;Harp guitars: Harp Guitars are difficult to classify as there are many variations within this type of guitar. They are typically rare and uncommon in the popular music scene. Most consist of a regular guitar, plus additional 'harp' strings strung above the six normal strings. The instrument is usually acoustic and the harp strings are usually tuned to lower notes than the guitar strings, for an added bass range. Normally there is neither fingerboard nor frets behind the harp strings. Some harp guitars also feature much higher pitch strings strung below the traditional guitar strings. The number of harp strings varies greatly, depending on the type of guitar and also the player's personal preference (as they have often been made to the player's specification).  /ref> The Pikasso guitar; 4 necks, 2 sound holes, 42 strings] and also the Oracle Harp Sympitar; 24 strings (with 12 sympathetic strings protruding through the neck) are modern examples.

;Extended-range guitars: For well over a century guitars featuring seven, eight, nine, ten or more strings have been used by a minority of guitarists as a means of increasing the range of pitch available to the player. Usually, it is bass strings that are added. Classical guitars with an extended range are useful for playing lute repertoire, some of which was written for lutes with more than six courses.

;Guitar battente: The battente is smaller than a classical guitar, usually played with four or five metal strings. It is mainly used in Calabria (a region in southern Italy) to accompany the voice.

This Fender Stratocaster has features common to many electric guitars: multiple pickups, a whammy bar, volume and tone knobs.




Electric guitars can have solid, semi-hollow, or hollow bodies, and produce little sound without amplification. Electromagnetic pickups convert the vibration of the steel strings into electrical signals which are fed to an amplifier through a cable or radio transmitter. The sound is frequently modified by other electronic devices or the natural distortion of valves (vacuum tubes) in the amplifier. There are two main types of pickup, single and double coil (or humbucker), each of which can be passive or active. The electric guitar is used extensively in jazz, blues, and rock and roll, and was commercialized by Gibson in collaboration with Les Paul, and independently by Leo Fender of Fender Music. The lower fretboard action (the height of the strings from the fingerboard) and its electrical amplification lend the electric guitar to some techniques which are less frequently used on acoustic guitars. These include tapping, extensive use of legato through pull-offs and hammer-ons (also known as slurs), pinch harmonics, volume swells, and use of a tremolo arm or effects pedals.

Seven-strings were popularized in the 1980s and 1990s in part due to the release of the Ibanez Universe guitar, endorsed by Steve Vai. Other artists go a step further, by using an 8 string guitar with two extra low strings. Although the most common 7-string has a low B string, Roger McGuinn (of The Byrds and Rickenbacker) uses an octave G string paired with the regular G string as on a 12 string guitar, allowing him to incorporate chiming 12 string elements in standard 6 string playing.

The electric bass guitar is similar in tuning to the traditional double bass viol.
Hybrids of acoustic and electric guitars are also common. There are also more exotic varieties, such as guitars with two, three,  The Official Steve Vai Website - www.vai.com > The Machines > Steve's Guitars   or rarely four necks, all manner of alternate string arrangements, fretless fingerboards (used almost exclusively on bass guitars, meant to emulate the sound of a stand-up bass), 5.1 surround guitar, and such.

Some electric guitar and electric bass guitar models feature Piezoelectric pickups, which function as transducers to provide a sound closer to that of an acoustic guitar with the flip of a switch or knob, rather than switching guitars.




225px210px

# Headstock
# Nut
# Machine heads (or pegheads, tuning keys, tuning machines, tuners)
# Frets
# Truss rod                                                                     
# Inlays
# Neck 
# Heel (acoustic) – Neckjoint (electric)
# Body
# Pickups
# Electronics
# Bridge
# Pickguard
# Back
# Soundboard (top)
# Body sides (ribs)
# Sound hole, with Rosette inlay
# Strings
# Saddle
# Fretboard (or Fingerboard)




Guitars can be constructed to meet the demands of both left and right-handed players. Traditionally the dominant hand is assigned the task of plucking or strumming the strings. For the majority of people this entails using the right hand. This is because musical expression (dynamics, tonal expression and colour etc) is largely determined by the plucking hand, while the fretting hand is assigned the lesser mechanical task of depressing and gripping the strings. This is similar to the convention of the violin family of instruments where the right hand controls the bow. A minority, however, believe that left-handed people should learn to play guitars strung in the manner used by right-handed people, simply to standardise the instrument.




The headstock is located at the end of the guitar neck furthest from the body. It is fitted with machine heads that adjust the tension of the strings, which in turn affects the pitch. Traditional tuner layout is "3+3" in which each side of the headstock has three tuners (such as on Gibson Les Pauls). In this layout, the headstocks are commonly symmetrical. Many guitars feature other layouts as well, including six-in-line (featured on Fender Stratocasters) tuners or even "4+2" (Ernie Ball Music Man). However, some guitars (such as Steinbergers) do not have headstocks at all, in which case the tuning machines are located elsewhere, either on the body or the bridge.




The nut is a small strip of bone, plastic, brass, corian, graphite, stainless steel, or other medium-hard material, at the joint where the headstock meets the fretboard. Its grooves guide the strings onto the fretboard, giving consistent lateral string placement. It is one of the endpoints of the strings' vibrating length. It must be accurately cut, or it can contribute to tuning problems due to string slippage, and/or string buzz.




Also called the fingerboard, the fretboard is a piece of wood embedded with metal frets that comprises the top of the neck. It is flat on classical guitars and slightly curved crosswise on acoustic and electric guitars. The curvature of the fretboard is measured by the fretboard radius, which is the radius of a hypothetical circle of which the fretboard's surface constitutes a segment. The smaller the fretboard radius, the more noticeably curved the fretboard is. Most modern guitars feature a 12" neck radius, while older guitars from the 1960s and 1970s usually feature a 6-8" neck radius. Pinching a string against the fretboard effectively shortens the vibrating length of the string, producing a higher pitch. Fretboards are most commonly made of rosewood, ebony, maple, and sometimes manufactured or composite materials such as HPL or resin. See below on section "Neck" for the importance of the length of the fretboard in connection to other dimensions of the guitar.




Frets are metal strips (usually nickel alloy or stainless steel) embedded along the fretboard and located at exact points that divide the scale length in accordance with a specific mathematical formula. Pressing a string against a fret determines the strings' vibrating length and therefore its resultant pitch. The pitch of each consecutive fret is defined at a half-step interval on the chromatic scale. Standard classical guitars have 19 frets and electric guitars between 21 to 24 frets (though Ibanez has issued guitars with as many as 36 frets.)

Frets are laid out to a mathematical ratio that results in equal tempered division of the octave. The ratio of the spacing of two consecutive frets is the twelfth root of two. The twelfth fret divides the scale length in two exact halves and the 24th fret position divides the scale length in half yet again. Every twelve frets represents one octave. In practice, luthiers determine fret positions using the constant 17.817, which is derived from the twelfth root of two. The scale length divided by this value yields the distance from the nut to the first fret. That distance is subtracted from the scale length and the result is divided in two sections by the constant to yield the distance from the first fret to the second fret. Positions for the remainder of the frets are calculated in like manner.

There are several different fret gauges, which can be fitted according to player preference. Among these are "jumbo" frets, which have much thicker gauge, allowing for use of a slight vibrato technique from pushing the string down harder and softer. "Scalloped" fretboards, where the wood of the fretboard itself is "scooped out" between the frets allows a dramatic vibrato effect. Fine frets, much flatter, allow a very low string-action but require other conditions such as curvature of the neck to be well maintained in order to prevent buzz.

On steel-string guitars, frets are eventually bound to wear down; when this happens, frets can be replaced or, to a certain extent, leveled, polished, recrowned, or reshaped as required.




The truss rod is a metal rod that runs along the inside of the neck. It is used to correct changes to the neck's curvature caused by the neck timbers aging, changes in humidity or to compensate for changes in the tension of strings. The tension of the rod and neck assembly is adjusted by a hex nut or an allen-key bolt on the rod, usually located either at the headstock, sometimes under a cover, or just inside the body of the guitar underneath the fretboard and accessible through the sound hole. Some truss rods can only be accessed by removing the neck. The truss rod counteracts the immense amount of tension the strings place on the neck, bringing the neck back to a straighter position. Turning the truss rod clockwise will tighten it, counteracting the tension of the strings and straightening the neck or creating a backward bow. Turning the truss rod counter-clockwise will loosen it, allowing string tension to act on the neck and creating a forward bow. Adjusting the truss rod affects the intonation of a guitar as well as the height of the strings from the fingerboard, called the action. Some truss rod systems, called "double action" truss systems, tighten both ways, allowing the neck to be pushed both forward and backward (standard truss rods can only be released to a point beyond which the neck will no longer be compressed and pulled backward). Classical guitars do not require truss rods as their nylon strings exert a lower tensile force with lesser potential to cause structural problems. 
By : ANTO C-Balln3k Bengkayang Club




Inlays are visual elements set into the exterior surface of a guitar. The typical locations for inlay are on the fretboard, headstock, and on acoustic guitars around the soundhole, known as the rosette. Inlays range from simple plastic dots on the fretboard to intricate works of art covering the entire exterior surface of a guitar (front and back). Some guitar players have used LEDs in the fretboard to produce a unique lighting effects onstage.

Fretboard inlays are most commonly shaped like dots, diamond shapes, parallelograms, or large blocks in between the frets. Dots are usually inlaid into the upper edge of the fretboard in the same positions, small enough to be visible only to the player. Some older or high-end instruments have inlays made of mother of pearl, abalone, ivory, coloured wood or other exotic materials and designs. Simpler inlays are often made of plastic or painted. High-end classical guitars seldom have fretboard inlays as a well trained player is expected to know his or her way around the instrument.

In addition to fretboard inlay, the headstock and soundhole surround are also frequently inlaid. The manufacturer's logo or a small design is often inlaid into the headstock. Rosette designs vary from simple concentric circles to delicate fretwork mimicking the historic rosette of lutes. Bindings that edge the finger and sound boards are sometimes inlaid. Some instruments have a filler strip running down the length and behind the neck, used for strength and/or to fill the cavity through which the trussrod was installed in the neck.

Elaborate inlays are a decorative feature of many limited edition, high-end and custom-made guitars. Guitar manufacturers often release such guitars to celebrate significant or historic milestones.




A guitar's frets, fretboard, tuners, headstock, and truss rod, all attached to a long wooden extension, collectively constitute its neck. The wood used to make the fretboard will usually differ from the wood in the rest of the neck. The bending stress on the neck is considerable, particularly when heavier gauge strings are used (see Tuning), and the ability of the neck to resist bending (see Truss rod) is important to the guitar's ability to hold a constant pitch during tuning or when strings are fretted. The rigidity of the neck with respect to the body of the guitar is one determinant of a good instrument versus a poor one. The shape of the neck can also vary, from a gentle "C" curve to a more pronounced "V" curve. There are many different types of neck profiles available, giving the guitarist many options.
Some aspects to consider in a guitar neck may be the overall width of the fingerboard, scale (distance between the frets), the neck wood, the type of neck construction (for example, the neck may be glued in or bolted on), and the shape (profile) of the back of the neck. Other type of material used to make guitar necks are graphite (Steinberger guitars), aluminium (Kramer Guitars, Travis Bean and Veleno guitars), or carbon fiber (Modulus Guitars and ThreeGuitars).

Double neck electric guitars have two necks, allowing the musician to quickly switch between guitar sounds.




This is the point at which the neck is either bolted or glued to the body of the guitar. Almost all acoustic guitars, with the primary exception of Taylors, have glued (otherwise known as set) necks, while electric guitars are constructed using both types.

Commonly used set neck joints include mortise and tenon joints (such as those used by CF Martin & Co. guitars), dovetail joints (also used by CF Martin on the D28 and similar models) and Spanish heel neck joints which are named after the shoe they resemble and commonly found in classical guitars. All three types offer stability. Bolt-on necks, though they are historically associated with cheaper instruments, do offer greater flexibility in the guitar's set-up, and allow easier access for neck joint maintenance and repairs.

Another type of neck, only available for solid body electric guitars, is the neck-through-body construction. These are designed so that everything from the machine heads down to the bridge are located on the same piece of wood. The sides (also known as wings) of the guitar are then glued to this central piece. Some luthiers prefer this method of construction as they claim it allows better sustain of each note. Some instruments may not have a neck joint at all, having the neck and sides built as one piece and the body built around it.




Modern guitar strings are constructed of metal, polymers, or animal or plant product materials.

Instruments utilising "steel" strings may have strings made of alloys incorporating steel, nickel or phosphor bronze. Classical and flamenco instruments historically used gut strings, but these have been superseded by polymer materials, such as nylon and fluorocarbon materials. Bass strings for both instruments are wound rather than monofilament.




In acoustic guitars, string vibration is transmitted through the bridge and saddle to the body via sound board. The sound board is typically made of tone woods such as spruce or cedar. Timbers for tone woods are chosen for both strength and ability to transfer mechanical energy from the strings to the air within the guitar body. Sound is further shaped by the characteristics of the guitar body's resonant cavity.

In electric guitars, transducers known as pickups convert string vibration to an electric signal, which in turn is amplified and fed to speakers, which vibrate the air to produce the sound we hear. Nevertheless, the body of the electric guitar still performs a role in shaping the resultant tonal signature.

In an acoustic instrument, the body of the guitar is a major determinant of the overall sound quality. The guitar top, or soundboard, is a finely crafted and engineered element made of tonewoods such as spruce and red cedar. This thin piece of wood, often only 2 or 3mm thick, is strengthened by differing types of internal bracing. The top is considered by many luthiers to be the dominant factor in determining the sound quality. The majority of the instrument's sound is heard through the vibration of the guitar top as the energy of the vibrating strings is transferred to it.

Body size, shape and style has changed over time. 19th century guitars, now known as salon guitars, were smaller than modern instruments. Differing patterns of internal bracing have been used over time by luthiers. Torres, Hauser, Ramirez, Fleta, and C.F. Martin were among the most influential designers of their time. Bracing not only strengthens the top against potential collapse due to the stress exerted by the tensioned strings, but also affects the resonance characteristics of the top. The back and sides are made out of a variety of timbers such as mahogany, Indian rosewood and highly regarded Brazilian rosewood (Dalbergia nigra). Each one is primarily chosen for their aesthetic effect and can be decorated with inlays and purfling.

The body of an acoustic guitar has a sound hole through which sound is projected. The sound hole is usually a round hole in the top of the guitar under the strings. Air inside the body vibrates as the guitar top and body is vibrated by the strings, and the response of the air cavity at different frequencies is characterised, like the rest of the guitar body, by a number of resonance modes at which it responds more strongly.

Instruments with larger areas for the guitar top were introduced by Martin in an attempt to create louder volume levels. The popularity of the larger "dreadnought" body size amongst acoustic performers is related to the greater sound volume produced.




Most electric guitar bodies are made of wood and include a plastic pick guard. Boards wide enough to use as a solid body are very expensive due to the worldwide depletion of hardwood stock since the 70's, so the wood is rarely one solid piece. Most bodies are made of two pieces of wood with some of them including a seam running down the centre line of the body. The most common woods used for electric guitar body construction include maple, basswood, ash, poplar, alder, and mahogany. Many bodies will consist of good sounding but inexpensive woods, like ash, with a "top", or thin layer of another, more attractive wood (such as maple with a natural "flame" pattern) glued to the top of the basic wood. Guitars constructed like this are often called "flame tops". The body is usually carved or routed to accept the other elements, such as the bridge, pickup, neck, and other electronic components. Most electrics have a polyurethane or nitrocellulose lacquer finish.
Other alternative materials to wood, are used in guitar body construction. Some of these include carbon composites, plastic material (such as polycarbonate) and aluminium alloys.




Pickups are transducers attached to a guitar that detect (or "pick up") string vibrations and convert the mechanical energy of the string into electrical energy. The resultant electrical signal can then be electronically amplified. The most common type of pickup is electromagnetic in design. These contain magnets that are tightly wrapped in a coil, or coils, of copper wire. Such pickups are usually placed right underneath the guitar strings. Electromagnetic pickups work on the same principles and in a similar manner to an electrical generator. The vibration of the strings causes a small voltage to be created in the coils surrounding the magnets; this signal voltage is later amplified.

Traditional electromagnetic pickups are either single-coil or double-coil. Single-coil pickups are susceptible to noise induced from electric fields, usually mains-frequency (60 or 50 hertz) hum. The introduction of the double-coil humbucker in the mid-1950s did away with this problem through the use of two coils, one of which is wired in a reverse polarity orientation.

The types and models of pickups used can greatly affect the tone of the guitar. Typically, humbuckers, which are two magnet–coil assemblies attached to each other are traditionally associated with a heavier sound. Single-coil pickups, one magnet wrapped in copper wire, are used by guitarists seeking a brighter, twangier sound with greater dynamic range.

Modern pickups are tailored to the sound desired. A commonly applied approximation used in selection of a pickup is that less wire (lower DC resistance) = brighter sound, more wire = "fat" tone. Other options include specialized switching that produces coil-splitting, in/out of phase and other effects. Guitar circuits are either active, needing a battery to power their circuit, or, as in most cases, equipped with a passive circuit.

Fender Stratocaster type guitars generally utilize three single-coil pickups, while most Gibson Les Paul types use humbucker pickups.

Piezoelectric, or piezo, pickups represent another class of pickup. These employ piezoelectricity to generate the musical signal and are popular in hybrid electro-acoustic guitars. A crystal is located under each string, usually in the saddle. When the string vibrates, the shape of the crystal is distorted, and the stresses associated with this change produce tiny voltages across the crystal that can be amplified and manipulated.

Some piezo-equipped guitars use what is known as a hexaphonic pickup.  "Hex" is a prefix meaning six. In a hexaphonic pickup separate outputs are obtained from discrete piezoelectric pickups for each of the six strings. This arrangement allows the signal to be easily modified by on-board modelling electronics, as in the Line 6 Variax brand of electric guitars; the guitars allow for a variety of different sounds to be obtained by digitally manipulating the signal. This allows a guitar to mimic many vintage models of guitar, as well as output alternate tunings without the need to adjust the strings.

Another use for hexaphonic pickups is to send the output signals to a MIDI interpretation device, which determines the note pitch, duration, attack and decay characteristics and so forth. The MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) interpreter then sends the note information to a sound bank device. The resulting sound can closely mimic numerous types of instruments.



On guitars that have them, these components and the wires that connect them allow the player to control some aspects of the sound like volume or tone. These at their simplest consist of passive components such as potentiometers and capacitors, but may also include specialized integrated circuits or other active components requiring batteries for power, for preamplification and signal processing, or even for assistance in tuning. In many cases the electronics have some sort of shielding to prevent pickup of external interference and noise.




The top, back and ribs of an acoustic guitar body are very thin (1-2 mm), so a flexible piece of wood called lining is glued into the corners where the rib meets the top and back. This interior reinforcement provides 5 to 20 mm of solid gluing area for these corner joints. Solid linings are often used in classical guitars, while kerfed lining is most often found in steel string acoustics. Kerfed lining is also called kerfing (because it is scored, or kerfed to allow it to bend with the shape of the rib).

During final construction, a small section of the outside corners is carved or routed out and then filled with binding material on the outside corners and decorative strips of material next to the binding, which are called purfling. This binding serves to seal off the endgrain of the top and back. Purfling can also appear on the back of an acoustic guitar, marking the edge joints of the two or three sections of the back.

Binding and purfling materials are generally made of either wood or plastic.




The main purpose of the bridge on an acoustic guitar is to transfer the vibration from the strings to the soundboard, which vibrates the air inside of the guitar, thereby amplifying the sound produced by the strings.

On both electric and acoustic guitars, the bridge holds the strings in place on the body. There are many varied bridge designs. There may be some mechanism for raising or lowering the bridge to adjust the distance between the strings and the fretboard (action), and/or fine-tuning the intonation of the instrument. Some are spring-loaded and feature a "whammy bar", a removable arm which allows the player to modulate the pitch moving the bridge up and down. The whammy bar is sometimes also referred to as a "tremolo bar" (see Tremolo for further discussion of this term – the effect of rapidly changing pitch produced by a whammy bar is more correctly called "vibrato"). Some bridges also allow for alternate tunings at the touch of a button.

On almost all modern electric guitars, the bridge is adjustable for each string so that intonation stays correct up and down the neck. If the open string is in tune but sharp or flat when frets are pressed, the bridge can be adjusted with a screwdriver or hex key to remedy the problem. In general, flat notes are corrected by moving the bridge forward and sharp notes by moving it backwards. On an instrument correctly adjusted for intonation, the actual length of each string from the nut to the bridge saddle will be slightly but measurably longer than the scale length of the instrument. This additional length is called compensation, which flattens all notes a bit to compensate for the sharping of all fretted notes caused by stretching the string during fretting.




Also known as a scratchplate. This is usually a piece of laminated plastic or other material that protects the finish of the top of the guitar from damage due to the use of a plectrum or fingernails. Electric guitars sometimes mount pickups and electronics on the pickguard. It is a common feature on steel-string acoustic guitars. Vigorous performance styles such as flamenco, which can involve the use of the guitar as a percussion instrument, call for a scratchplate to be fitted to nylon-string instruments.




The Vibrato (pitch bend) unit found on many electric guitars has also had slang terms applied to it, such as "tremolo bar (or arm)", "sissy bar", "wang bar", "slam handle", "whammy handle", and "whammy bar". The latter two slang terms led stompbox manufacturers to use the term 'whammy' in coming up with a pitch raising effect introduced by popular guitar effects pedal brand "Digitech".

Leo Fender, who did much to create the electric guitar, also created much confusion over the meaning of the terms "tremolo" and "vibrato", specifically by misnaming the "tremolo" unit on many of his guitars and also the "vibrato" unit on his "Vibrolux" amps. In general, vibrato is a variation in pitch, whereas tremolo is a variation in volume, so the tremolo bar is actually a vibrato bar and the "Vibrolux" amps actually had a tremolo effect. However, following Fender's example, electric guitarists traditionally reverse these meanings when speaking of hardware devices and the effects they produce. See vibrato unit for a more detailed discussion, and tremolo arm for more of the history.

A distinctly different form of mechanical vibrato found on some guitars is the Bigsby vibrato tailpiece, commonly called Bigsby. This vibrato wraps the strings around a horizontal bar, which is then rotated with a handle by the musician.

Another type of pitch bender is the B-Bender, a spring and lever device mounted in an internal cavity of a solid body electric, guitar that allows the guitarist to bend just the B string of the guitar using a lever connected to the strap handle of the guitar. The resulting pitch bend is evocative of the sound of the pedal steel guitar.



Strip of fabric with a leather or synthetic leather piece on each end. Made to hold a guitar via the shoulders, at an adjustable length to suit the position favoured by the guitarist.




Self-tuning guitars are computerized guitars programmed to tune themselves.  The Gibson Robot guitar, released in 2007, was the first of this kind.  Gibson is currently working on a new self-tuning model called the Dark Fire.




The guitar is a transposing instrument. Its pitch sounds one octave lower than it is notated on a score.

A variety of different tunings may be used. However, the most common by far is known as "Standard Tuning," which has the strings tuned from a low E, to a high E, traversing a two octave range – EADGBE.

The pitches are as follows:

The table below shows pitch names found over the six strings of a guitar in standard tuning, from the nut (zero), to the twelfth fret.

A table to depict pitch names found over the six strings of a guitar in standard tuning, from the nut (zero), to the twelfth fret.

A guitar using this tuning can tune to itself using the fact, with a single exception, that the 5th fret on one string is the same note as the next open string; that is, a 5th-fret note on the sixth string is the same note as the open fifth string. The exception is the interval between the second and third strings, in which the 4th-fret note on the third string is equivalent to the open second string.

Standard tuning has evolved to provide a good compromise between simple fingering for many chords and the ability to play common scales with minimal left hand movement. Uniquely, the guitar's tuning allows for repeatable patterns which also facilitates the ease in which common scales can be played.    There are also a variety of commonly used alternate tunings – most of which are open tunings that create entire chord voicings without fretting any strings. Many open tunings, where all of the strings are tuned to a similar note or chord, are popular for slide guitar playing. Alternate tunings are used for two main reasons: the ease of playing and the variation in tone that can be achieved.

Many guitarists use a long established, centuries-old tuning variation where the lowest string is 'dropped' two semi-tones down. Known as Drop-D (or dropped D) tuning it is, from low to high, DADGBE. This allows for open string tonic and dominant basses in the keys of D and D minor. It also enables simple fifths (powerchords) to be more easily played. Eddie Van Halen sometimes uses a device known as a 'D Tuna,' the patent for which he owns. It is a small lever, attached to the fine tuner of the 6th string on a Floyd Rose tremolo, which allows him to easily drop that string's tuning to a D. Many contemporary rock bands detune all strings by several semi-tones, making, for example, Drop-C or Drop-B tunings, However this terminology is inconsistent with that of "drop-D" as "drop-D" refers to dropping a single string to the named pitch. Often these new tunings are also simply referred to as the "Standard" of the note in question e.g. – "D Standard" (DGcfad').

Some guitarists tune in straight fourths, avoiding the major third between the third and second strings. While this makes playing major and minor triads slightly more difficult, it facilitated playing chords with more complicated extended structures . One proponent of the straight fourth tuning (EADGCF) is Stanley Jordan.

As with all stringed instruments a large number of scordatura are possible on the guitar. A common form of scordatura involves tuning the 3rd string to F# to mimic the standard tuning of the lute, especially when playing renaissance repertoire originally written for the lute.



Though a guitar may be played on its own, there are a variety of common accessories used for holding and playing the guitar.




A capo (short for capotasto) is used to change the pitch of open strings. Capos are clipped onto the fret board with the aid of spring tension, or in some models, elastic tension. To raise the guitar's pitch by one semitone, the player would clip the capo onto the fret board just below the first fret. Their use allows a player to play in different keys without having to change the chord formations they use. Because of the ease with which they allow guitar players to change keys, they are sometimes referred to as "cheaters" or the "hillbilly crutch." Classical performers are known to use them to enable modern instruments to match the pitch of historical instruments such as the renaissance lute.




A slide, (neck of a bottle, knife blade or round metal bar) used in blues and rock to create a glissando or 'hawaiian' effect. The necks of bottles were often used in blues and country music. Modern slides are constructed of glass, plastic, ceramic, chrome, brass or steel, depending on the weight and tone desired. An instrument that is played exclusively in this manner, (using a metal bar) is called a steel guitar or pedal steel. Slide playing to this day is very popular in blues music and country music. Some slide players use a so called Dobro guitar.

Some performers that have become famous for playing slide are Robert Johnson, Elmore James, Ry Cooder, George Harrison, Bonnie Raitt, Derek Trucks, Warren Haynes, Duane Allman, Muddy Waters and Rory Gallagher.




A variety of guitar picksA "guitar pick" or "plectrum" is a small piece of hard material which is generally held between the thumb and first finger of the picking hand and is used to "pick" the strings. Though most classical players pick solely with their finger nails, the "pick" is often used for electric and some acoustic guitars. Though today they are mainly plastic, variations do exist, such as bone, wood, steel or tortoise shell. Tortoise shell was the most commonly used material in the early days of pick making but as tortoises became more and more endangered, the practice of using their shells for picks or anything else was banned. Tortoise shell picks are often coveted for a supposedly superior tone and ease of use.

Picks come in many shapes and sizes. Picks vary from the small jazz pick to the large bass pick. The thickness of the pick often determines its use. A thinner pick (between .2 and .5 mm) is usually used for strumming or rhythm playing, whereas thicker picks (between .7 and 1.5+ mm) are usually used for single-note lines or lead playing. The distinctive guitar sound of Billy Gibbons is attributed to using a quarter or peso as a pick. Similarly, Brian May is known to use a sixpence coin as a pick. Retired session musician David Persons is known for using old credit cards, cut to the correct size, as plectrum.

Thumb picks and finger picks that attach to the finger tips are sometimes employed in finger-picking styles.



* Flamenco! The Guitar and the Music – An Indiana University research paper on Flamenco, the indigenous music of the Gypsies of southern Spain, written by  Jeff Foster, 1987.
* Physics of the guitar string - at blogspot.com
*  Parts of a guitar




* List of guitarists

* List of guitar manufacturers
* List of compositions for guitar
* Luthier
* 3rd Bridge
* Electric guitar
* Acoustic guitars
* Steel-string acoustic guitar
* Guitar solo
* Guitar harmonics
* Guitar effects
* Guitar amplifier
* Double-neck guitjo
* Prepared guitar
* Tablature
* Tonewood
* Fretless guitar
* Stringed instrument tunings




*  Instruments In Depth: The Guitar An online feature from Bloomingdale School of Music (October, 2007)
*  Stalking the Oldest Six-String Guitar
*  Guitar physics
*  International Guitar Research Archive
*  The first rock guitars
*  allGuitarists.com – Web forum and online magazine about guitar.
*  Guitar Albums Collection - World of Instrumental Music

Xylophone



The xylophone (from the Greek words ξύλον -  xylon, "wood" + φωνή - phone, "voice", meaning "wooden sound") is a musical instrument in the percussion family which probably originated in Indonesia. Nettl, Bruno, "Music in Primitive Culture", Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-59000-7, p 98(1956)  It consists of wooden bars of various lengths that are struck by plastic, wooden, or rubber mallets. Each bar is tuned to a specific pitch of the musical scale. Xylophone can refer to western style concert xylophones or to one of the many wooden mallet percussion instruments found around the world. Xylophones are tuned to different scale systems depending on their origin, including pentatonic, heptatonic, diatonic, or chromatic. The arrangement of the bars is generally from low (longer bars) to high (shorter bars).



Gusikow's 'wood and straw instrument', from Lewald's 'Europa'
The xylophone is an ancient instrument that originated independently in Africa and Asia. Wooden bars were originally seated on a series of hollow gourds, and the gourds generated the resonating notes that are produced on modern instruments by metal tubes. For centuries, xylophone makers struggled with methods of tuning the wooden bars. Old methods consisted of arranging the bars on tied bundles of straw, and, as still practiced today, placing the bars adjacent to each other in a ladder-like layout. Ancient mallets were made of willow wood with spoon-like bowls on the beaten ends.

Java and Bali use xylophones (called gambang) in gamelan ensembles. Still have traditional significance in Africa, Malaysia, Melanasia, Center Valley, Indonesia, and regions of the Americas.

It is likely that the xylophone reached Europe during the Crusades and the earliest historical reference in Europe is in 16th Century Germany in organist Arnold Schlick's Spiegel der Orgelmacher und Organisten.   Vienna Symphonic Library Online   The earliest known model was from the 9th Century in southeast Asia  (However, a model of a hanging wood instrument exists, dated to ca. 2000 BC in China.)

The xylophone, which had been known in Europe since the Middle Ages, was by the 19th Century associated largely with the folk music of Eastern Europe, notably Poland and Eastern Germany. By 1830, the xylophone had been popularized to some extent by a Russian virtuoso named Michael Josef Gusikov,  Michael Joseph Guzikow Archives 
who through extensive tours had made the instrument known.  His instrument was the five-row “continental style” xylophone made of 28 crude wooden bars, arranged in semi-tones in the form of a trapezoid, and resting on straw supports.  It was sometimes called the “strohfiedel” or “straw fiddle”.  There were no resonators and it was played with spoon shaped sticks.  According to musicologist, Curt Sachs, Gusikov performed in garden concerts, variety shows, and as a novelty at symphony concerts. Certainly in the 1830’s a xylophone solo was a novelty.  Noted musicians, including Felix Mendelssohn, Frederic Chopin, and Franz Liszt spoke very highly of Gusikov’s performances.  Perhaps due to his great influence, xylophonists continued to be featured in theater shows and concert halls until well into the 20th century

The xylophone is a precursor to the vibraphone, which was developed in the 1920s.

Other forms of "xylophone" include xylophonist, and xylophoning.




2000BC – First xylophone artifacts:   Wood harmonicon with 16 suspended wood bars found in China   Xylophone-like 'ranat' of Hindi regions.  Numerous temple reliefs of musicians playing xylophones support these evidences.

1300 – First written account

1500 – First brought to Europe, and then Latino countries by African slaves between   1500-1700A.D. It evolved in Central and South America into the marimba.

1511 – First European mention by German composer Arnolt Schlick; also  listed by Praetorius in his catalogue of musical instruments (a.k.a.,  Strohfideln, or Hulzen G'lachter, or Gigelyra, or straw fiddle )

1866, April 7 – The word xylophone is coined, recorded in the Athenaeum: "A prodigy ... who does wonderful things with little drumsticks o­n a machine of wooden keys, called the 'xylophone.’"

1874  – The first usage of the European-derived orchestral by Charles Camille Saint-Saens in 'Danse Macabre'.

1910 – 1940  golden age, a favorite in vaudeville and ragtime.   Famous xylophonists of the era include George Cary, George Hamilton Green, and Harry Breuer.   It was displaced in jazz by the vibraphone.



The modern western-style xylophone has bars made of rosewood or more commonly, kelon, an extremely durable fiberglass that allows a louder sound at the expense of tone quality. Some xylophones can be as small as 2 1/2 octaves but concert xylophones are typically 3 1/2 or 4 octaves.

Concert xylophones have resonators below the bars to enhance the tone and sustain. Frames are made of wood or cheap steel tubing; more expensive xylophones feature height adjustment and more stability in the stand.

In other music cultures, xylophones have wooden bars and a wooden frame. Some versions have resonators made of gourds.



Western-style xylophones are characterised by a bright, sharp tone and high register. Modern xylophones include resonating tubes below the bars. A xylophone with a range extending downwards into the marimba range is called a xylorimba.




* Glockenspiel
* Vibraphone
* Lamellophone
* Marimba
* Lithophone
* Mbila (musical instrument)
* Metallophone
* Musical Stones of Skiddaw
* Balafon
* Thongophone



Cello



The violoncello (abbreviated to cello, or  'cello,  plural cellos or celli—the c is  , as in the ch in "check", thus "chel-lo") is a bowed string instrument. A person who plays a cello is called a cellist. The cello is used as a solo instrument, in chamber music, and as a member of the string section of an orchestra.



Study of a three-quarter size cello.
The name Cello is an abbreviation of the Italian violoncello, which means "little violone", referring to the violone ("big viol"), the lowest-pitched instrument of the viol family, the group of string instruments that were superseded by the violin family. Thus, the name carries both an augmentative "-one" ("big") and a diminutive "-cello" ("little"). Cellos are tuned in fifths, starting with C2 (two octaves below middle C) as the lowest string, followed by G2, D3, and A3. It is tuned the same way as the viola, only an octave lower.

The cello is most closely associated with European classical music, and has been described as the closest sounding instrument to the human voice.  Welcome::. to Academic Journals Inc   The instrument is a part of the standard orchestra and is the bass voice of the string quartet, as well as being part of many other chamber groups. A large number of concertos and sonatas have been written for the cello. The instrument is less common in popular music, but is sometimes featured in pop and rock recordings. The cello has also recently appeared in major hip-hop and R & B performances, such as singers Rihanna and Ne-Yo's performance at the American Music Awards.    The instrument has also been modified for Indian classical music by Nancy Lesh and Saskia Rao-de Haas.

Among the most well-known Baroque works for the cello are J. S. Bach's six unaccompanied Suites. From the Classical era, the two concertos by Joseph Haydn in C major and D major stand out, as do the five sonatas for cello and pianoforte of Beethoven which span the important three periods of his compositional evolution. Romantic era repertoire includes the Schumann Concerto, the Dvořák Concerto as well as the two sonatas and the Double Concerto by Brahms. Compositions from the early 20th century include Elgar's Cello Concerto in E minor, Debussy's Sonata for Cello and Piano and unaccompanied cello sonatas by Zoltán Kodály and Paul Hindemith. The cello's versatility made it popular with composers in the mid- to late twentieth century such as Prokofiev, Shostakovich, Britten, Ligeti and Dutilleux, encouraged by soloists who specialized in contemporary music (such as Siegfried Palm and Mstislav Rostropovich) commissioning from and collaborating with composers.



The violoncello da spalla (sometimes "violoncello piccolo da spalla" or "violoncello da span") was the first cello referred to in print (by Jambe de Fer in 1556). Delbanco, Nicholas. (January 1, 2001) Harper's Bazaar.  The Countess of Stanlein Restored. (Violoncello owned by Bernard Greenhouse is restored). Volume 302; Issue 1808; Page 39.  "Violone" means a larger "viola" (viol), while "-cello" in Italian is a diminutive and spalla means "shoulder" in Italian so that violoncello da spalla suggest a "little big violin" that may be held on the shoulder so that the player could perform while walking or that the early, short-necked instrument was hung across the shoulder by a strap.  By the turn of the twentieth century, it had grown customary to abbreviate the name violoncello to 'cello, with the apostrophe indicating the six missing prefix letters.  It now is acceptable to use the name "cello" without the apostrophe and as a full designation.



The cello is typically made from wood, although other materials such as carbon fiber or aluminum may be used. A traditional cello has a spruce top, with maple for the back, sides, and neck. Other woods, such as poplar  willow, are sometimes used for the back and sides. Less expensive cellos frequently have tops and backs made of laminated wood.

The top and back are traditionally hand-carved, though less expensive cellos are often machine-produced. The sides, or ribs, are made by heating the wood and bending it around forms. The cello body has a wide top bout, narrow middle formed by two C-bouts, and wide bottom bout, with the bridge and sound holes just below the middle.

The top and back of the cello has decorative border inlay known as purfling.  Purfling looks attractive, but is not just for decoration.  If a cello is dropped or bumped against something so that damage occurs, the purfling can stop cracks from forming.  A crack may form at the rim of the instrument, but will spread no further.  Without purfling, cracks can spread up or down the top or back.  Playing, traveling and the weather all affect the cello and can increase a crack if purfling is not in place.  Less expensive instruments typically have the purfling painted on.

Cello manufacturer Luis & Clark constructs cellos from carbon fiber.  Carbon fiber instruments are particularly suitable for outdoor playing because of the strength of the material and its resistance to humidity and temperature fluctuations.

In the late 1920s and early 1930s, the Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa) as well as German luthier G.A. Pfretzschner produced an untold number of aluminum cellos (in addition to aluminum double basses and violins). An advertisement published in N.Y. Music Service catalogue (1930) reads: "...made entirely of aluminum with the exception of the fingerboard. They have many advantages over the wood basses and violoncellos, as they cannot crack, split or warp and are made to last forever ... possessing a tone quality that is deep, resonant and responsive to the utmost degree. Violoncello $150."



Above the main body is the carved neck, which leads to a pegbox and the scroll. The neck, pegbox, and scroll are normally carved out of a single piece of wood. Attached to the neck and extending over the body of the instrument is the fingerboard. The nut is a raised piece of wood, where the fingerboard meets the pegbox, which the strings rest on. The pegbox houses four tuning pegs, one for each string. The pegs are used to tune the cello by either tightening or loosening the string. The scroll is a traditional part of the cello and all other members of the violin family. Ebony is usually used for the tuning pegs, fingerboard, and nut, but other hard woods, such as boxwood or rosewood, can be used.



Strings on a cello have cores made out of gut, metal, or synthetic materials, such as Perlon. Most modern strings used today are also wound with metallic materials like aluminum, titanium and chromium. Cellists may mix different types of strings on their instruments.



The tailpiece and endpin are found in the lower part of the cello. The tailpiece is traditionally made of ebony or another hard wood, but can also be made of plastic or steel. It attaches the strings to the lower end of the cello, and can have one or more fine tuners. The endpin or spike is made of wood, metal or rigid carbon fiber and supports the cello in playing position. In the Baroque period the cello was held between the calves. Around the 1830s, the Belgian cellist Auguste Adrien Servais introduced the endpin and propagated its use. Modern endpins are retractable and adjustable; older ones were removed when not in use. (The word "endpin" sometimes also refers to the button of wood located at this place in all instruments in the violin family, but this is usually called "tailpin".) The sharp tip of the cello's endpin is sometimes capped with a rubber tip that protects the tip from dulling and prevents the cello from slipping on the floor.




The bridge of a cello, with a mute
The bridge holds the strings above the cello and transfers their vibrations to the top of the instrument and the soundpost inside (see below). The bridge is not glued, but rather held in place by the tension of the strings. The f-holes, named for their shape, are located on either side of the bridge, and allow air to move in and out of the instrument as part of the sound-production process. The f-holes also act as access points to the interior of the cello for repairs or maintenance. Sometimes a small hose containing a water-soaked sponge, called a Dampit, is inserted through the f-holes, and serves as a humidifier.



Internally, the cello has two important features: a bass bar, which is glued to the underside of the top of the instrument, and a round wooden sound post, which is wedged between the top and bottom plates. The bass bar, found under the bass foot of the bridge, serves to support the cello's top and distribute the vibrations. The sound post, found under the treble side of the bridge, connects the back and front of the cello. Like the bridge, the sound post is not glued, but is kept in place by the tensions of the bridge and strings. Together, the bass bar and sound post transfer the strings' vibrations to the top (front) of the instrument (and to a lesser extent the back), acting as a diaphragm to produce the instrument's sound.



Cellos are constructed and repaired using hide glue, which is strong but reversible, allowing for disassembly when needed. Tops may be glued on with diluted glue, since some repairs call for the removal of the top. Theoretically, hide glue is weaker than the body's wood, so as the top or back shrinks side-to-side, the glue holding it will let go, avoiding a crack in the plate.



A cello bow.
Traditionally, bows are made from pernambuco or brazilwood. Both come from the same species of tree (Caesalpina echinata), but pernambuco, used for higher-quality bows, is the heartwood of the tree and is darker in color than brazilwood (which is sometimes stained to compensate). Pernambuco is a heavy, resinous wood with great elasticity  which makes it an ideal wood for instrument bows.

Bows are also made from other materials, such as carbon-fiber-stronger than wood-and fiberglass(often used to make inexpensive, low-quality student bows). An average cello bow is 73 cm long (shorter than a violin or viola bow) 3 cm high (from the frog to the stick) and 1.5 cm wide. The frog of a cello bow typically has a rounded corner like that of a viola bow, but is wider. A cello bow is roughly 10 grams heavier than a viola bow, which in turn is roughly 10 grams heavier than a violin bow.

Bow hair is traditionally horsehair, though synthetic hair in varying colors is also used. Prior to playing, a musician-in this case a cellist-tightens the bow by turning a screw to pull the frog (the part of the bow under the hand) back, and increase the tension of the hair. Rosin is applied by the player to make the hairs sticky. Bows need to be re-haired periodically. Ideally a bow should be re-haired every year, but this is not in great practice because of cost.



The cello developed from the bass violin, first referred to by Jambe de Fer in 1556, which was originally a three-string instrument. The first instance of a composer specifying the bass violin may have been Gabrieli in Sacrae symphoniae, 1597.  Monteverdi referred to the instrument as "basso de viola da braccio" in Orfeo (1607). Although the first bass violin, possibly invented by Amati as early as 1538, was most likely inspired by the viol, it was created to be used in consorts with the violin. The bass violin was actually often referred to as a "violone," or "large viola," as were the viols of the same period. Instruments that share features with both the bass violin and the viola de gamba appear in Italian art of the early 1500s...

The invention of wire-wound strings (fine wire around a thin gut core), around 1660 in Bologna, allowed for a finer bass sound than was possible with purely gut strings on such a short body. Bolognese makers exploited this new technology to create the cello, a somewhat smaller instrument suitable for solo repertoire due to both the timbre of the instrument and the fact that the smaller size made it easier to play virtuosic passages. This instrument had disadvantages as well, however. The cello's light sound was not as suitable for church and ensemble playing, so it had to be doubled by basses or violones.

Around 1700, Italian players popularized the cello in northern Europe, although the bass violin (basse de violon) continued to be used for another two decades in France.   Many existing bass violins were literally cut down in size in order to convert them into cellos according to the smaller pattern cello as developed by Stradivari, who also made a number of old pattern large cello's (the 'Servais'). Cyr 1982  The bass violin remained the "most used" instrument in England as late as 1740, where the violoncello was still "not common." Grassineau 1740  The sizes, names, and tunings of the cello varied widely by geography and time.  The size was not standardized until around 1750.

Despite similarities to the viola da gamba, the cello is actually part of the viola da braccio family, meaning "viol of the arm", which includes, among others, the violin and viola. Though paintings like Bruegel's "The Rustic Wedding" and de Fer in his Epitome Musical suggest that the bass violin had alternate playing positions, these were short-lived and the more practical and ergonomic a gamba position eventually replaced them entirely.

A cello strung with gut strings. Note the absence of fine-tuning pins on the tailpiece.
Baroque era cellos differed from the modern instrument in several ways. The neck has a different form and angle which matches the baroque bass-bar and stringing. Modern cellos have an endpin at the bottom to support the instrument (and transmit some of the sound through the floor), while Baroque cellos are held only by the calves of the player. Modern bows curve in and are held at the frog; Baroque bows curve out and are held closer to the bow's point of balance. Modern strings normally have a metal core, although some use a synthetic core; Baroque strings are made of gut, with the G and C strings wire-wound. Modern cellos often have fine-tuners connecting the strings to the tailpiece, which make it much easier to tune the instrument, but such pins are rendered ineffective by the flexibility of the gut strings used on Baroque cellos. Overall, the modern instrument has much higher string tension than the Baroque cello, resulting in a louder, more projecting tone, with fewer overtones.

No educational works specifically devoted to the cello existed before the 18th century, and those that do exist contain little value to the performer beyond simple accounts of instrumental technique. The earliest cello manual is Michel Corrette's Méthode, thèorique et pratique pour apprendre en peu de temps le violoncelle dans sa perfection (Paris, 1741).



Seated Cellist


The cello is usually played while seated. Its weight is supported mainly by its endpin or spike, which rests on the floor. Sometimes, an endpin support is needed to prevent the endpin from slipping on smooth surfaces. The cello is steadied on the lower bout between the knees of the seated player, and on the upper bout against the upper chest. The neck of the cello is above the player's left shoulder, and the C-String tuning peg is just behind the left ear. The bow is drawn horizontally across the strings. In early times, female cellists sometimes played side-saddle, since it was considered improper for a lady to part her knees in public. A player's handedness does not alter the way the cello is held or used. In exceedingly rare cases the cello has been played in a mirror-image posture: this is usually because of a physical disability of one of the player's arms or hands which makes the required technique impossible for that side of the body. In such a situation, the player must decide whether or not to reverse the set-up of the cello (the string positions, bass-bar, sound post, fingerboard shape, and bridge carving are all asymmetrical).



The position of the left hand fingers along the strings determine the pitch of the note. The closer to the bridge that the string is depressed, the higher in pitch will be the resulting sound, because the vibrating string length has been shortened. In the neck positions (which use just less than half of the fingerboard, nearest the top of the instrument), the thumb rests on the back of the neck; in thumb position (a general name for notes on the remainder of the fingerboard) the thumb usually rests alongside the fingers on the string and the side of the thumb is used to play notes. The fingers are normally held curved with each knuckle bent, with the fingertips in contact with the string. If a finger is required on two (or more) strings at once to play perfect fifths (in double stops or chords) it is used flat. In slower, or more expressive playing, the contact point can move slightly away from the nail to the pad of the finger, allowing a fuller vibrato.



Vibrato is a small oscillation in the pitch of a note, usually considered expressive. It is created by a partial rotation of the upper arm at the shoulder joint, which translates into a linear oscillation of the lower arm. The fixed point of contact of the fingertip on the string absorbs this motion by rocking back and forth. It is this change in the attitude of the fingertip to the string which causes the pitch to vary. Vibrato is a key expressive device, and a well-developed vibrato technique is an essential element of a modern cellist's skill. In some styles of music, such as that of the Romantic period, vibrato may be used on almost every note. However, in other styles, such as Baroque repertoire, vibrato is used only rarely, as an ornament. In any case, the choice of whether to use vibrato, and how much, is normally a stylistic decision on the part of the player. Typically, the lower the pitch of the note played, the wider and slower the vibrato.



Harmonics played on the cello fall into two classes; natural and artificial. Natural harmonics are produced by lightly touching (but not depressing) the string with the finger at certain places, and then bowing (or, rarely, plucking) the string. For example, the halfway point of the string will produce a harmonic that is one octave above the unfingered (open) string. Natural harmonics only produce notes that are part of the harmonic series for the string on which they occur. Artificial harmonics (also called False harmonics), in which the player depresses the string fully with one finger while touching the same string lightly with another finger, can produce any notes above middle C. They usually appear with the touching note a perfect fourth above the stopped note, which produces a sound two octaves above the stopped note, although other intervals are available. All harmonics produce a distinctive flute-like sound, and are usually performed without vibrato.



Glissando ("sliding", in Italian) is an effect played by sliding the finger up or down the fingerboard without releasing the string. This causes the pitch to rise and fall smoothly, without separate, discernible steps.



In cello playing, the bow is much like the breath of a wind instrument player. Arguably, it is the major determinant in the expressiveness of the playing. The right hand holds the bow and controls the duration and character of the notes. The bow is drawn across the strings roughly halfway between the end of the fingerboard and the bridge, in a direction perpendicular to the strings. The bow is held with all five fingers of the right hand, the thumb opposite the fingers and closer to the cellist's body. The shape of the hand should resemble that of its relaxed state, with all fingers curved, including the thumb. The transmission of weight from the arm to the bow happens through the pronation (inward rotation) of the forearm, which pushes the index finger and to a lesser degree the middle finger onto the bow. The necessary counterforce is provided by the thumb. Depending upon the school of training, the other two fingers are used in various degrees to help maintain the angle of the bow to the string and are critical to controlling the bow when it is off the string. (See also spiccato).

In English, the terminology for bow direction (down and up) can be misleading. A downbow is drawn to the right of the player, and an upbow to the left. A downbow is drawn by first using the upper arm, then the forearm, then the wrist (turning slightly inward) in order to maintain a straight stroke. An upbow is drawn by moving first the forearm, then the upper arm, then the wrist (pushing slightly upward). The bow is mostly used perpendicular to the string being played. In order to perform string changes the whole arm is either lowered or lifted, with as little wrist movement as possible in order to maintain the angle to the string. However, flexibility of the wrist is necessary when changing the bow direction from up-bow to down-bow and vice versa. For very fast bow movements, the wrist is used to accomplish the horizontal movement of bow. For longer strokes, the arm is used as well as the wrist.

Tone production and volume of sound depend on a combination of several factors. The three most important ones are: bow speed, weight applied to the string, and point of contact of the bow hair with the string. A good player will be capable of a very even tone, and will counter the natural tendency to play with the most force with the part of the bow nearest to the frog or heel, and the least force near the tip. The closer to the bridge the string is bowed, the more projecting and brighter the tone, with the extreme (sul ponticello) producing a metallic, shimmery sound. If bowing closer to the fingerboard (sul tasto), the sound produced will be softer, more mellow, and less defined.



Double stops involve the playing of two notes at the same time. Two strings are fingered simultaneously, and the bow is drawn so as to sound them both at once. Triple and quadruple stops may also be played (in a "broken" fashion), but are difficult to sustain because of the change in slope of the bridge. To extend the technique in this area, Frances-Marie Uitti has invented a two-bow system: one bow plays above the strings and one below, allowing for sustained triple and quadruple stops. However, this technique is very rarely seen or used.



In pizzicato playing, the string is plucked directly with the fingers or thumb. Usually this is done with the right hand, while the bow is held away from the strings by the rest of the hand or (for extended passages) set down. A single string can be played pizzicato, or double, triple, or quadruple stops can be played. Occasionally, a player must bow one string with the right hand and simultaneously pluck another with the left. This is marked by a "+" above the note. Strumming of chords is also possible, in guitar fashion.



Col legno is the technique in which the player uses the wood rather than the hair of the bow on the strings; it takes two different forms, col legno battuto and col legno tratto. Col legno battuto is performed as a percussive technique with no sustaining of the sound. The much less common alternative is col legno tratto, wherein the wood is drawn across the string as the hair is in a normal bow stroke. Some players refuse to use this technique because of potential damage to the bow.



In spiccato playing, the strings are not "drawn" by the bow hair but struck by it, while still retaining some horizontal motion, to generate a more percussive, crisp sound. It may be performed by using the wrist to "dip" the bow into the strings. Spiccato is usually associated with lively playing. On a violin, spiccato bowing comes off the string, but on a cello, the wood of the bow may rise briskly up without the hair actually leaving the string. While playing spiccato, the bow is literally bouncing off the string. Cello players simply "dip" the bow into the string, and touch it very fast, and then lift the bow off the string.



In staccato, the player moves the bow a small distance and stops it on the string, making a short sound, the rest of the written duration being taken up by silence.



Legato is a technique where the notes are smoothly connected without accents or breaks.



Sul ponticello "on the bridge" refers to bowing closer to the bridge, while sul tasto "on the fingerboard" calls for bowing nearer the end of the fingerboard. Ponticello calls for more bow weight and slower bow speed, and produces a "harder" sound, with strong overtone content. Sul tasto, in extreme cases called "flautando," produces a more flute-like sound, with more emphasis on the fundamental frequency of the note, and softer overtones.



1/8 size cello with full size cello
Standard-sized cellos are referred to as "full-size". However, cellos come in smaller (fractional) sizes, from "seven-eighths" and "three-quarter" down to "one-sixteenth" sized cellos (e.g. 7/8, 3/4, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/10, 1/16). The smaller-sized cellos are identical to standard cellos in construction, range, and usage, but are simply 'scaled-down' for the benefit of children and shorter adults. A "half-size" cello is not actually half the size of a "full-size", but only slightly smaller. Many smaller cellists prefer to play a "seven-eighths" cello as the hand stretches in the lower positions are less demanding. Although rare, cellos in sizes larger than four-fourths do exist. Cellists with unusually large hands may play a slightly larger than full-sized cello. Cellos made before approximately 1700 tended to be considerably larger than those made after that date, and than those made and commonly played today. Around 1680, string-making technology made lower pitches on shorter strings possible. The cellos of Stradivari, for example, can be clearly divided into two models, with the style made before 1702 characterized by larger instruments (of which only three examples are extant in their original size and configuration), and the style made during and after 1702, when Stradivari, presumably in response to the "new" type of strings, began making cellos of a smaller size. This later model is the one most commonly used by modern luthiers.



There are many accessories for the cello.
*Cases are used to protect the cello and bow (or multiple bows) when traveling and for safe storage. They are often made of carbon fiber, fiber-glass, and less commonly wood.
*Rosin, made from conifer resin, is applied to the bow hairs to increase the effectiveness of the friction, grip or bite, and allow proper sound production.  Rosin may have additives to modify the friction such as beeswax, gold, silver or tin.
*Endpin stops or straps (tradenames include Rockstop and Black Hole) keep the cello from sliding if the end pin does not have a rubber piece on the end (used on wood floors) though in many cases a rubber piece will not suffice on even a wood floor. Many Cellists often use a square or rectangle of carpet that can be secured under the front two legs of the chair as an endpin stop. This is however less likely to be seen in a professional arena and more used in rehearsal or in private.Players might even use their shoe to keep the endpin in place
*Wolf tone eliminators are sometimes placed on cello strings between the tailpiece and the bridge in order to eliminate acoustic anomalies known as wolf tones or "wolfs".
*Mutes are used to change the sound of the cello by reducing overtones. Practice mutes (made of metal) significantly reduce the instrument's volume (they are also referred to as "hotel mutes"). The most common mute is a rubber disc with two holes to fit the two middle strings. It sits just after the bridge and has a flap that can be placed over the top of the bridge to mute the vibrations travelling down it to the sound post inside the cello. These are especially used due to their simplicity and can be taken off or put on very quickly due to the fact that they stay on the strings past the bridge, which don't vibrate.
*Metronomes provide a steady tempo by sounding out a certain number of beats per minute. They are adjustable to fit the tempo of the piece. Many models can also produce a tuning pitch of A4 (440 Hz), among others. These can, of course, be used for all instruments.
*Humidifiers are used to control and stabilize the humidity around and inside the cello and are popular with travelling cellists. Often placed inside the cello itself or inside the case. Some players will not use humidifiers inside their cellos because they have the potential to drip, which may cause damage to the cello
*Tuners are used to tune the instrument. A tuner helps by providing a reference pitch to tune to. Most musicians cannot memorize the exact sound of a pitch, so they need a reference pitch



Cellos are part of the standard symphony orchestra. Usually, the orchestra includes eight to twelve cellists. The cello section, in standard orchestral seating, is located on stage left (the audience's right) in the front, opposite the first violin section. However, some orchestras and conductors prefer switching the positioning of the viola and cello sections. The principal, or "first chair" cellist is the section leader, determining bowings for the section in conjunction with other string principals, and playing solos. Principal players always sit closest to the audience.

The cellos are a critical part of orchestral music; all symphonic works involve the cello section, and many pieces require cello soli or solos. Much of the time, cellos provide part of the harmony for the orchestra. On many occasions, the cello section will play the melody for a brief period of time, before returning to the harmony. There are also cello concertos, which are orchestral pieces in which a featured, solo cellist is accompanied by an entire orchestra.



There are numerous cello concertos - where a solo cello is accompanied by an orchestra -  notably 25 by Vivaldi, 12 by Boccherini, 3 by C.P.E. Bach, 2 by Haydn, 2 by Saint-Saëns, 2 by Dvořák, and one each by Schumann, Lalo and Elgar. Beethoven's Triple Concerto for Cello, Violin and Piano and Brahms' Double Concerto for Cello and Violin are also part of the concertante repertoire although in both cases the cello shares solo duties with at least one other instrument. Moreover, several composers wrote large-scale pieces for cello and orchestra, which are concertos in all but name. The most important are Strauss' tone poem Don Quixote, Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo Theme, Bloch's Schelomo and Bruch's Kol Nidrei.

In the 20th century, the cello repertoire grew. This was due to the influence of virtuoso cellist Mstislav Rostropovich who inspired, commissioned and/or premiered dozens of new works. Among these, Prokofiev's Symphonia Concertante, Britten's Cello Symphony and the concertos of Shostakovich, Lutosławski and Dutilleux have already become part of the standard repertoire. In addition, Hindemith, Barber, Honegger, Villa-Lobos, Myaskovsky, Walton, Glass, Rodrigo, Arnold, Penderecki and Ligeti also wrote major concertos for other cellists (notably Gregor Piatigorsky, Siegfried Palm and Julian Lloyd Webber). 
Cellists Julian Lloyd Webber (left) and Mstislav Rostropovich
There are also many sonatas for cello and piano. Those written by Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Chopin, Brahms, Grieg, Rachmaninoff, Debussy, Shostakovich, Prokofiev and Britten are the most famous.

Finally, there are several unaccompanied pieces for cello, most importantly J.S. Bach's  six Unaccompanied Suites for Cello (arguably the most important cello pieces), Zoltán Kodály's Sonata for Solo Cello and Britten's three Unaccompanied Suites for Cello. Other notable examples include Dutilleux' Trois Strophes sur le Nom de Sacher, Berio's Les Mots Sont Allés (both part of a series of twelve compositions for solo cello commissioned by Rostropovich for Swiss conductor Paul Sacher's 70th birthday), Ligeti and Carter's sonatas and Xenakis' Nomos Alpha and Kottos.



The cello is a member of the traditional string quartet as well as string quintets, sextet or trios and other mixed ensembles. 
There are also pieces written for two, three, four or more cellos; this type of ensemble is also called a "cello choir" and its sound is familiar from the introduction to Rossini's William Tell Overture as well as Zaccharias' prayer scene in Verdi's Nabucco. As a self-sufficient ensemble, its most famous repertoire is Villa-Lobos' first of his Bachianas Brasileiras for cello ensemble (the fifth is for soprano and 8 cellos). Another example is Boulez' Messagesquisse for 7 cellos. The Twelve Cellists of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra (or "the Twelve" as they have since taken to being called) specialize in this repertoire and have commissioned many works, including arrangements of well-known popular songs.



Though the cello is less common in popular music than in classical music, it is sometimes featured in pop and rock recordings. The cello is rarely part of a group's standard lineup (though like its cousin the violin it is becoming more common in mainstream pop).

In the 1960s, artists such as the Beatles and Cher used the cello in popular music, in songs such as "Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)," "Eleanor Rigby" and "Strawberry Fields Forever". In the 1970s, the Electric Light Orchestra enjoyed great commercial success taking inspiration from so-called "Beatlesque" arrangements, adding the cello (and violin) to the standard rock combo line-up and in 1978 the UK based rock band, Colosseum II, collaborated with cellist Julian Lloyd Webber on the recording Variations. Most notably, Pink Floyd included a cello solo in their 1970 epic instrumental Atom Heart Mother. Bass guitarist Mike Rutherford of Genesis was originally a cellist and included some cello parts in their Foxtrot album.

Established non-traditional cello groups include Apocalyptica, a group of Finnish cellists best known for their versions of Metallica songs, Rasputina, a group of two female cellists committed to an intricate cello style intermingled with Gothic music, Von Cello, a cello fronted rock power trio, and Break of Reality who mix elements of classical music with the more modern rock and metal genre. These groups are examples of a style that has become known as cello rock. The crossover string quartet bond also includes a cellist. Silenzium and Vivacello are Russian (Novosibirsk) groups playing rock and metal and having more and more popularity in Siberia.

More recent bands using the cello are Aerosmith, Nirvana, Oasis, Murder by Death, Cursive, and OneRepublic. So-called "chamber pop" artists like Kronos Quartet, The Vitamin String Quartet and Margot and the Nuclear So and So's have also recently made cello common in modern alternative rock. Heavy metal band System of a Down has also made use of the cello's rich sound. The indie rock band The Stiletto Formal are known for using a cello as a major staple of their sound, and the orch-rock group,The Polyphonic Spree, which has pioneered the use of stringed and symphonic instruments, employs the cello in very creative ways for many of their "psycadelic-esque" melodies.

Pop star Richard Marx uses a cello in some of his studio recordings, such as "One Thing Left" and "In This All Alone."

Post-rock bands and other avant-garde groups commonly feature strings; cellos and violins over violas and contrabasses.

Modern musical theatre pieces like Jason Robert Brown's The Last Five Years, Duncan Sheik's Spring Awakening, Adam Guettel's Floyd Collins, and Ricky Ian Gordon's My Life with Albertine use small string ensembles (including solo cellos) to a prominent extent.

The cello can also be used in bluegrass and folk music, with notable players including Ben Sollee of the Sparrow Quartet and the "Cajun cellist" Sean Grissom.

The cello and the double bass are now also used in some modern Chinese orchestras .

In jazz, bassists Oscar Pettiford and Harry Babasin were among the first to use the cello as a solo instrument; both tuned their instrument in fourths, an octave above the double bass.  Fred Katz (who was not a bassist) was one of the first notable jazz cellists to use the instrument's standard tuning and arco technique.  Contemporary jazz cellists include Abdul Wadud, Diedre Murray, Ron Carter, Dave Holland, David Darling, Lucio Amanti, Akua Dixon, Ernst Reijseger, Fred Lonberg-Holm, Vincent Courtois, Jean-Charles Capon, and Erik Friedlander.




Cellos are made by luthiers, specialists in building and repairing stringed instruments, ranging from guitars to violins. The following luthiers are notable for the cellos they have produced:
*Nicolò Amati and others in the Amati family
*William Forster
*Nicolò Gagliano
*Matteo Goffriller
*Giovanni Battista Guadagnini
*Giuseppe Guarneri
*Domenico Montagnana
*Giovanni Battista Rogeri
*Francesco Ruggieri
*Stefano Scarampella
*Antonio Stradivari
*David Tecchler 
*Carlo Giuseppe Testore
*Jean Baptiste Vuillaume




A person who plays the cello is called a cellist, not a "celloist." For a list of notable cellists, see the list of cellists. See also .




Specific instruments are, or become, famous, for a variety of reasons.   An instrument's notability may arise from its age, the fame of its maker, its physical appearance, its acoustic properties, and its use by notable performers.  The most famous instruments are generally known for all of these things.  The most highly prized instruments are now collector's items, and are priced beyond the reach of most musicians.  These instruments are typically owned by some kind of organization or investment group, which loans the instrument to a performer for his or her use.  (For example, the Davidov Stradivarius, which is currently in the possession of one of the most widely-known living cellists, Yo-Yo Ma, is actually owned by the Vuitton Foundation.

Some notable cellos:
*the "King", by Andrea Amati, is one of the oldest known cellos, built between 1538 and 1560.  It is in the collection of the National Music Museum in South Dakota. National Music Museum page 
*Servais Stradivarius is in the collection of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC
*Davidov Stradivarius, played by Jacqueline du Pré, currently played by Yo-Yo Ma
*Barjansky Stradivarius, played by Julian Lloyd Webber
*Bonjour Stradivarius, played by Soo Bae
*Paganini-Ladenburg Stradivarius, played by Clive Greensmith of the Tokyo String Quartet
*Duport Stradivarius, played by Mstislav Rostropovich
*Piatti Stradivarius, 1720, played by Carlos Prieto




* Brahms guitar
* Electric cello
* List of solo cello pieces
* List of compositions for cello and piano
* List of compositions for cello and orchestra
* Double Concerto for Violin and Cello
* Triple concerto for violin, cello, and piano
* String instrument repertoire
* 
* Apocalyptica




*Stephen Bonta. "Violoncello", Grove Music Online, ed. L. Macy (accessed January 28 2006),  grovemusic.com (subscription access).
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*



*  The Internet Cello Society: an online community of cellists; includes several forums.
*  Sources for the prescribed sheet music for the ABRSM practical Cello exams.
*  Cello Teacher's Friend : A place for cellists to share ideas.
*  cellist.nl: An international register of professional cellists, teachers, and students.
*  Cello History: A brief history of the cello
*  A Cello Teacher Training Manual And Syllabus



*  Bowed Radio (podcast focusing on new music for bowed string instruments)
*  Elgar Cello Concerto Performance


Lyre



The  lyre is a stringed musical instrument well known for its use in classical antiquity and later. The recitations of the Ancient Greeks were accompanied by lyre playing. The lyre of Classical Antiquity was ordinarily played by being strummed with a plectrum, like a guitar or a zither, rather than being plucked, like a harp. The fingers of the free hand silenced the unwanted strings in the chord.



Lyres from various times and places are regarded by some organologists (specialists in the history of musical instruments) as a branch of the zither family, a general category which includes many different stringed instruments, such as lutes, guitars, kantele, and psalteries, not just zithers.

Others view the lyre and zither as being two separate classes. Those specialists maintain that the zither is distinguished by strings spread across all or most of its soundboard, or the top surface of its sound chest, also called soundbox or resonator, as opposed to the lyre, whose strings emanate from a more or less common point off the soundboard, such as a tailpiece. Examples of that difference include a piano (a keyed zither) and a violin (referred to by some as a species of fingerboard lyre). Some specialists even argue that instruments such as the violin and guitar belong to a class apart from the lyre because they have no yokes or uprights surmounting their resonators as "true" lyres have. This group they usually refer to as the lute class, after the instrument of that name, and include within it the guitar, the violin, the banjo, and similar stringed instruments with fingerboards. Those who differ with that opinion counter by calling the lute, violin, guitar, banjo, and other such instruments "independent fingerboard lyres," as opposed to simply "fingerboard lyres" such as the Welsh crwth, which have both fingerboards and frameworks above their resonators.

One point on which organologists universally agree is that the distinction between harps on the one hand and zithers and lyres (and, in some views, lutes) on the other is that harps have strings emanating directly from the soundboard and residing in a plane that is basically perpendicular to the soundboard, as opposed to the other instruments, whose strings are attached to one or more points somewhere off the soundboard (e.g., wrest pins on a zither, tailpiece on a lyre or lute) and lie in a plane essentially parallel to it. They also agree that neither the overall size of the instrument nor the number of strings on it have anything to do with its classification. For example, small Scottish and Irish harps can be held on the lap, while some ancient Sumerian lyres appear to have been as tall as a seated man (see Kinsky; also Sachs, History ..., under "References"). Regarding the number of strings, the standard 88-key piano has many more strings than even the largest harp.



Women posing as a Siren with a lyre in 1913.
A classical lyre has a hollow body or sound-chest (also known as soundbox or resonator). Extending from this sound-chest are two raised arms, which are sometimes hollow, and are curved both outward and forward. They are connected near the top by a crossbar or yoke. An additional crossbar, fixed to the sound-chest, forms the bridge which transmits the vibrations of the strings. The deepest note was that farthest from the player's body; as the strings did not differ much in length, more weight may have been gained for the deeper notes by thicker strings, as in the violin and similar modern instruments, or they were tuned by having a  slacker tension. The strings were of gut. They were stretched between the yoke and bridge, or to a tailpiece below the bridge. There were two ways of tuning: one was to fasten the strings to pegs which might be turned; the other was to change the place of the string upon the crossbar; probably both expedients were used simultaneously.
Statue of the  Olympian deity, Apollo holding a lyre.
According to ancient Greek mythology, the young god Hermes created the lyre from a slaughtered cow from Apollo's sacred herd, using the intestines for the strings. Lyres were associated with Apollonian virtues of moderation and equilibrium, contrasting with the Dionysian pipes and aulos, both of which represented ecstasy and celebration.

Locales in southern Europe, western Asia, or north Africa have been proposed as the historic birthplace of the genus. The instrument is still played in north-eastern parts of Africa.

Some of the cultures using and developing the lyre were the Aeolian and Ionian Greek colonies on the coasts of Asia (ancient Asia Minor, modern day Turkey) bordering the Lydian empire. Some mythic masters like Orpheus, Musaeus, and Thamyris were believed to have been born in Thrace, another place of extensive Greek colonization.
The name kissar (kithara) given by the ancient Greeks to Egyptian box instruments reveals the apparent similarities recognized by Greeks themselves. The cultural peak of ancient Egypt, and thus the possible age of the earliest instruments of this type, predates the 5th century classic Greece.
This indicates the possibility that the lyre might have existed in one of Greece's neighboring countries, either Thrace, Lydia, or Egypt, and was introduced into Greece at pre-classic times.



The number of strings on the classical lyre varied at different epochs, and possibly in different localities – four, seven and ten having been favorite numbers. They were used without a fingerboard, no Greek description or representation having ever been met with that can be construed as referring to one. Nor was a bow possible, the flat sound-board being an insuperable impediment. The plectrum, however, was in constant use. It was held in the right hand to set the upper strings in vibration; when not in use, it hung from the instrument by a ribbon. The fingers of the left hand touched the lower strings (presumably to silence those whose notes were not wanted).

There is no evidence as to the stringing of the Greek lyre in the heroic age. Plutarch says that Olympus and Terpander used but three strings to accompany their recitation. As the four strings led to seven and eight by doubling the tetrachord, so the trichord is connected with the hexachord or six-stringed lyre depicted on so many archaic Greek vases. The accuracy of this representation cannot be insisted upon, the vase painters being little mindful of the complete expression of details; yet one may suppose their tendency would be rather to imitate than to invent a number. It was their constant practice to represent the strings as being damped by the fingers of the left hand of the player, after having been struck by the plectrum which he held in the right hand. Before Greek civilization had assumed its historic form, there was likely to have been great freedom and independence of different localities in the matter of lyre stringing, which is corroborated by the antique use of the chromatic (half-tone) and enharmonic (quarter-tone) tunings pointing to an early exuberance, and perhaps also to an Asiatic bias towards refinements of intonation.



While the lyre is no longer played in modern Greece, the term lyra lives on as the name shared by various regional types of fiddles (bowed lutes) found throughout the country. There are two basic styles of lyra fiddles: 1) a pear-shaped instrument with a vaulted back which is found in the Greek islands – in particular, the Dodecanese and Crete – and the northern mainland regions of Macedonia and Thrace; and 2) an instrument with a narrow rectangular cylinder body of the Pontic  Greeks who trace their roots to Pontos (Pontus), the Black Sea region of northern Turkey. (The Pontic Greek lyra is also known as kemenche.) Both types of lyra typically have three strings. They are held vertically upright and bowed horizontally; if the player is seated, the instrument's base rests on the player's upper left thigh. The Cretan lyra is traditionally played in a duo with the laouto, a long-neck fretted lute that is strummed like a guitar.




Reproduction of the lyre from the royal burial at Sutton Hoo, late 6th/early 7th century AD

Other instruments known as lyres have been fashioned and used in Europe outside the Greco-Roman world since at least the early Middle Ages, and one view holds that many modern stringed instruments are late-emerging examples of the lyre class. There is no clear evidence that non-Greco-Roman lyres were played exclusively with plectra, and numerous instruments regarded by some as modern lyres are played with bows.

Lyres appearing to have emerged independently of Greco-Roman prototypes were used by the Teutonic, Gallic, Scandinavian, and Celtic peoples over a thousand years ago. Dates of origin, which probably vary from region to region, cannot be determined, but the oldest known fragments of such instruments are thought to date from around the sixth century of the Common Era. After the bow made its way into Europe from the Middle-East, around two centuries later, it was applied to several species of those lyres that were small enough to make bowing practical. There came to be two broad classes of bowed European yoke lyres: those with fingerboards dividing the open space within the yoke longitudinally, and those without fingerboards. The last surviving examples of instruments within the latter class were the Scandinavian talharpa and jouhikko. Different tones could be obtained from a single bowed string by pressing the fingernails of the player's left hand against various points along the string to fret the string.

The last of the bowed yoke lyres with fingerboard was the "modern" (ca. 1485 - ca. 1800) Welsh crwth. It had several predecessors both in the British Isles and in Continental Europe. Pitch was changed on individual strings by pressing the string firmly against the fingerboard with the fingertips. Like a violin, this method shortened the vibrating length of the string to produce higher tones, while releasing the finger gave the string a greater vibrating length, thereby producing a tone lower in pitch. This is the principle on which the modern violin and guitar work.

While the dates of origin and other evolutionary details of the European bowed yoke lyres continue to be disputed among organologists, there is general agreement that none of them were the ancestors of modern orchestral bowed stringed instruments, as once was thought.



In furniture design, a lyre arm is a wooden lyre-shaped element often used at the front of the arm of a chair, typically created as an exposed wooden part of a chair, sofa or other furniture piece.

A music holder used by marching bands is also called a "lyre" for its shape similar to this instrument.

Lyre also can denote the framework supporting the foot pedals underneath a piano. The term is most often used in connection with older pianos of ornate designs.

The constellation Lyra is said to resemble a lyre shape, but it looks more like a lute.



*Arabian peninsula - tanbūra
*Djibouti - tanbūra
*Egypt - kissar, tanbūra, simsimiyya
*England - rote
*Estonia - talharpa
*Ethiopia - begena, dita, krar
*Finland - Jouhikko
*Greece - barbiton, kithara, lyra 
*Iraq - sammu, tanbūra, zami, zinar
*Israel - kinnor
*Kenya - kibugander, litungu, nyatiti, obokano
*Norway - Giga
*Scotland - Gue
*Somalia - tanbūra
*Sudan - kissar, tanbūra
*Tanzania - litungu
*Uganda - endongo, ntongoli
*Wales - crwth
*Yemen - tanbūra, simsimiyya




*Harp




*Levy, Michael  "King David's Lyre; Echoes of Ancient Israel"; restoring the sound of the ancient Jewish Temple Lyre of the Levites  
* 
*Andersson, Otto. The Bowed Harp, translated and edited by Kathleen Schlesinger (London: New Temple Press, 1930).
*Bachmann, Werner. The Origins of Bowing, trans. Norma Deane (London: Oxford University Press, 1969).
*Jenkins, J. "A Short Note on African Lyres in Use Today." Iraq 31 (1969), p. 103 (+ pl. XVIII).
*Kinsky, George. A History of Music in Pictures (New York: E.P. Dutton, 1937).
*Sachs, Curt. The Rise of Music in the Ancient World, East and West (New York: W.W. Norton, 1943).
*Sachs, Curt. The History of Musical Instruments (New York: W.W. Norton, 1940).

London



London ( ;  ) is the capital of both England and the United Kingdom, and the largest urban area in the European Union. {{cite web|url= title=Largest EU City   An important settlement for two millennia, London's history goes back to its founding by the Romans.    Since its foundation, London has been part of many movements and phenomena throughout history, including the English Renaissance, the Industrial Revolution, and the Gothic Revival.  The city's core, the ancient City of London, still retains its limited medieval boundaries; but since at least the 19th century, the name "London" has also referred to the whole metropolis that has developed around it.    Today the bulk of this conurbation forms the London region of England    and the Greater London administrative area,    with its own elected mayor and assembly.

London is one of the the world's most important business, financial and cultural centres    and its influence in politics, education, entertainment, media, fashion and the arts contribute to its status as a major global city.       Global Cities: GaWC Inventory of World Cities 1999 Global cities#GaWC Inventory of World Cities (1999 Edition);  Global Cities: GaWC Inventory of World Cities 2004 Global cities#GaWC Leading World Cities (2004 Edition)  Central London is the headquarters of more than half of the UK's top 100 listed companies (the FTSE 100) and over 100 of Europe's 500 largest companies. The city is a major tourist destination both for domestic and overseas visitors, with annual expenditure by tourists of around £15 billion. London hosted the 1908 and 1948 Summer Olympic Games and will host the 2012 Summer Olympic Games.

Greater London contains four World Heritage Sites: the Tower of London; the historic settlement of Greenwich; the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew; and the site comprising the Palace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey and St. Margaret's Church.

London's population draws from a wide range of peoples, cultures, and religions, and over 300 languages are spoken within the city.    As of 2006, it had an official population of 7,512,400 within the boundaries of Greater London    and is the most populous municipality in the European Union.    As of 2001, the Greater London Urban Area had a population of 8,278,251    and the metropolitan area is estimated to have a total population of between 12 and 14 million , the largest metropolitan area in the EU. The public transport network, administered by Transport for London, is one of the most extensive in the world, and Heathrow Airport is the busiest airport in the world by international passenger traffic and the air space is the busiest of any city in the world.  International Passenger Traffic, Airports Council International




The etymology of London remains a mystery. The earliest etymological explanation can be attributed to Geoffrey of Monmouth in Historia Regum Britanniae. The name is described as originating from King Lud, who had allegedly taken over the city and named it Kaerlud.    This was slurred into Kaerludein and finally London. Many other theories have been advanced over the centuries, most of them deriving the name from Welsh or British, and occasionally from Anglo-Saxon or even Hebrew.   
Map of London in 1300, showing the medieval boundaries of the City of London
Although there is evidence of scattered Brythonic settlements in the area, the first major settlement was founded by the Romans in AD 43 as Londinium, following the Roman conquest of Britain.    This Londinium lasted for just seventeen years. Around 61, the Iceni tribe led by Queen Boudica stormed this first London, burning it to the ground.    The next, heavily planned incarnation of the city prospered and superseded Colchester as the capital of the Roman province of Britannia in 100. At its height in the 2nd century, Roman London had a population of around 60,000.

By the 600s, the Anglo-Saxons had created a new settlement called Lundenwic approximately   upstream from the old Roman city, 
around what is now Covent Garden.    It is likely that there was a harbour at the mouth of the River Fleet for fishing and trading, and this trading grew until the city was overcome by the Vikings and forced to relocate the city back to the location of the Roman Londinium to use its walls for protection.    Viking attacks continued to increase around the rest of South East England, until 886 when Alfred the Great recaptured London and made peace with the Danish leader, Guthrum.    The original Saxon city of Lundenwic became Ealdwic ("old city"), a name surviving to the present day as Aldwych, which is in the modern City of Westminster.

In a retaliatory attack, Ethelred's army achieved victory by pulling down London Bridge with the Danish garrison on top, and English control was re-established. Canute took control of the English throne in 1017, controlling the city and country until 1042, when his death resulted in a reversion to Saxon control under his pious stepson Edward the Confessor, who re-founded Westminster Abbey and the adjacent Palace of Westminster.    By this time, London had become the largest and most prosperous city in England, although the official seat of government was still at Winchester.

Following a victory at the Battle of Hastings, William the Conqueror, the then Duke of Normandy, was crowned King of England in the newly finished Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day 1066.    William granted the citizens of London special privileges, while building what is now known as the Tower of London, in the south-east corner of the city, to keep them under control. .   
The Great Exhibition
In 1097, William II began the building of Westminster Hall, close by the abbey of the same name. The hall became the basis of a new Palace of Westminster, the prime royal residence throughout the Middle Ages.       Westminster became the seat of the royal court and government (persisting until the present day), while its distinct neighbour, the City of London, was a centre of trade and commerce and flourished under its own unique administration, the Corporation of London. London grew in wealth and population during the Middle Ages. In 1100 its population was around 18,000; by 1300 it had grown to nearly 100,000.    King Edward I issued an edict in 1290, expelling all Jews from England.    Before the edict, there was an increasing population of Jews, whereas after this time, the population of Jews began to drop considerably.  Disaster struck during the Black Death in the mid-14th century, when London lost nearly a third of its population. Apart from the invasion of London during the Peasants' Revolt in 1381,    London remained relatively untouched by the various civil wars during the Middle Ages, such as the first and second Barons' Wars and the Wars of the Roses.

After the successful defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588, political stability in England allowed London to grow further. In 1603, James VI of Scotland came to the throne of England, essentially uniting the two countries. His enactment of harsh anti-Catholic laws made him unpopular, and an assassination attempt was made on 5 November 1605—the well-known Gunpowder Plot.

The Great Fire of London destroyed many parts of the city in 1666
Plague caused extensive problems for London in the early 17th century, culminating in the Great Plague in 1665–1666. This was the last major outbreak in England, possibly thanks to the disastrous fire of 1666.  The Great Fire of London broke out in the original City and quickly swept through London's wooden buildings, destroying large swathes of the city.  A first hand narrative of both plague and fire was provided by Sir Samuel Pepys.    Rebuilding took over ten years, largely under direction of a Commission appointed by King Charles II and chaired by Sir Christopher Wren.

Following London's growth in the 18th century, it became the world's largest city from about 1831 to 1925.    Rising traffic congestion on city centre roads led to the creation of the world's first metro system — the London Underground — in 1863, driving further expansion and urbanisation.    London's local government system struggled to cope with the rapid growth, especially in providing the city with adequate infrastructure. Between 1855 and 1889, the Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw infrastructure expansion. It was then replaced by the County of London, overseen by the London County Council, London's first elected city-wide administration.

A London street hit during the Blitz of World War II
The Blitz and other bombing by the German Luftwaffe during World War II killed over 30,000 Londoners and destroyed large tracts of housing and other buildings across London. In 1965 London's political boundaries were expanded to take into account the growth of the urban area outside the County of London's borders. The expanded area was called Greater London and was administered by the Greater London Council. An eco revival from the 1980s onwards re-established London's position as a pre-eminent international centre. However, as the seat of government and the most important city in the UK, it has been subjected to bouts of terrorism. Provisional Irish Republican Army bombers sought to pressure the government into negotiations over Northern Ireland, frequently disrupting city activities with bomb threats — some of which were carried out — until their 1997 cease-fire.    More recently, a series of coordinated bomb attacks were carried out by Islamic extremist suicide bombers on the public transport network on 7 July 2005—just 24 hours after London was awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics.




City Hall at night, home of the Greater London Authority



The administration of London is formed of two tiers — a city-wide, strategic tier and a local tier. City-wide administration is coordinated by the Greater London Authority (GLA), while local administration is carried out by 33 smaller authorities.    The GLA consists of two elected parts; the Mayor of London, who has executive powers, and the London Assembly, who scrutinise the Mayor's decisions and can accept or reject his budget proposals each year. The GLA was set up in 2000 to replace the similar Greater London Council (GLC) which had been abolished in 1986.    The headquarters of the GLA and the Mayor of London is at City Hall; the Mayor is Boris Johnson. The 33 local authorities are the councils of the 32 London boroughs and the City of London Corporation.    They are responsible for local services not overseen by the GLA, such as local planning, schools, social services, local roads and refuse collection.



London is the home of the Government of the United Kingdom which is located around the Houses of Parliament in Westminster.    Many government departments are located close to Parliament, particularly along Whitehall, including the Prime Minister's residence at 10 Downing Street.    The British Parliament is often referred to as the "Mother of Parliaments" (although this sobriquet was first applied to England itself by John Bright)    because it has been the model for most other parliamentary systems, and its Acts have created many other parliaments. There are 74 Members of Parliament (MPs) from London, who correspond to local parliamentary constituencies in the national Parliament by .    Of these 74 MPs, currently 44 are from the Labour Party, 21 are Conservatives, 8 are Liberal Democrats and one is from the RESPECT party.



West and central London seen from SPOT satellite
London can be geographically defined in a number of ways, although the situation was once even more ambiguous than it is now and open to periodic legal debate.    At London's core is the small, ancient City of London which is commonly known as 'the City' or 'the Square Mile'.    London's metropolitan area grew considerably during the Victorian era and again during the Interwar period, but expansion halted in the 1940s because of World War II and Green Belt legislation, and the area has been largely static since.    The London region of England, also commonly known as Greater London, is the area administered by the Greater London Authority.  The urban sprawl of the conurbation — or Greater London Urban Area — covers a roughly similar area, with a slightly larger population. Beyond this is the vast London commuter belt.

Map of Central LondonForty percent of Greater London is covered by the London postal district, within which 'LONDON' forms part of the postal address.    The London telephone area code covers a larger area, similar in size to Greater London, although some outer districts are omitted and some places just outside are included. The area within the orbital M25 motorway is sometimes used to define the "London area"    and the Greater London boundary has been aligned to it in places.    Greater London is split for some purposes into Inner London and Outer London.    Informally, the city is split into North, South, East, West and often also Central London.

The Metropolitan Police District, city-wide local government area and London transport area have varied over time, but broadly coincide with the Greater London boundary.    The Romans may have marked the centre of Londinium with the London Stone, still visible on Cannon Street.    The coordinates of the nominal centre of London (traditionally considered to be the original Eleanor Cross at Charing Cross, near the junction of Trafalgar Square and Whitehall) are approximately  . Trafalgar Square has also become a point for celebrations and protests.



Within London, both the City of London and the City of Westminster have City status and both the City of London and the remainder of Greater London are the ceremonial counties.    The current area of Greater London was historically part of the counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Essex and Hertfordshire.    Unlike most capital cities, London's status as the capital of the UK has never been granted or confirmed officially — by statute or in written form. Its position as the capital has formed through constitutional convention, making its position as de facto capital a part of the UK's unwritten constitution. The capital of England was moved to London from Winchester as the Palace of Westminster developed in the 12th and 13th centuries to become the permanent location of the royal court, and thus the political capital of the nation.    According to the Collins English Dictionary definition (1994) Collins English Dictionary. Collins Education plc.   of 'the seat of government,' London is not the capital of England, as England does not have its own government. However according to the Oxford English Reference dictionary definition  Oxford English Reference Dictionary. Oxford English.  of 'the most important town...' and many other authorities, "HC 501 0304.PDF" (PDF). Parliament Publications. Retrieved on 2008-06-06.   'England' (1994) Collins English Dictionary. Collins Education plc.   London is the capital of England.



Greater London covers an area of  .  Its primary geographical feature is the Thames, a navigable river which crosses the city from the south-west to the east. The Thames Valley is a floodplain surrounded by gently rolling hills including Parliament Hill, Addington Hills, and Primrose Hill. The Thames was once a much broader, shallower river with extensive marshlands; at high tide, its shores reached five times their present width.    Since the Victorian era it has been extensively embanked, and many of its London tributaries now flow underground. The Thames is a tidal river, and London is vulnerable to flooding.    The threat has increased over time due to a slow but continuous rise in high water level by the slow 'tilting' of Britain (up in the north and down in the south) caused by post-glacial rebound.    In 1974, a decade of work began on the construction of the Thames Barrier across the Thames at Woolwich to deal with this threat. While the barrier is expected to function as designed until roughly 2030, concepts for its future enlargement or redesign are already being discussed.




London has a temperate marine climate, like much of the British Isles, so the city rarely sees extremely high or low temperatures. Summers are warm with average high temperatures of   and lows of  , however, temperatures could exceed   on many days.   
Winters in London are chilly, but rarely below freezing with daytime temperatures around 2 - 8 °C (36 - 46 °F), while spring has mild days and cool evenings.

London has regular but generally light precipitation throughout the year, with average precipitation of   every year.
Snow is relatively uncommon, particularly because heat from the urban area can make London up to 5 °C (9 °F) hotter than the surrounding areas in winter. Snowfall, however, is usually, but not always, seen up to a few times a year. London is in USDA Hardiness zone 9, and AHS Heat Zone 2.

In the second half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th, London was noted for its dense fogs and smogs. Following the deadly Great Smog of 1952, the Clean Air Act 1956 was passed, leading to the decline of such severe pollution in the capital.




London's vast urban area is often described using a set of district names (e.g. Bloomsbury, Knightsbridge, Mayfair, Whitechapel, Fitzrovia). These are either informal designations, or reflect the names of superseded villages, parishes and city wards. Such names have remained in use through tradition, each referring to a local area with its own distinctive character, but often with no modern official boundaries. However, since 1965 Greater London has been divided into 32 London boroughs in addition to the ancient City of London.

The City of London is one of the world's three largest financial centres (alongside New York and Tokyo) with a dominant role in several international financial markets, including cross-border bank lending, international bond issuance and trading, foreign-exchange trading,    over-the-counter derivatives, fund management and foreign equities trading.    It also has the world's largest insurance market, the leading exchange for dealing in non-precious metals, the largest spot gold and gold lending markets, the largest ship broking market, and more foreign banks and investment houses than any other centre.  The City has its own governance and boundaries, giving it a status as the only completely autonomous local authority in London.    London's new financial and commercial hub is the Docklands area to the east of the City, dominated by the Canary Wharf complex. Other businesses locate in the City of Westminster, the home of the UK's national government and the well-known Westminster Abbey.

The West End is London's main entertainment and shopping district, with locations such as Oxford Street, Leicester Square, Covent Garden and Piccadilly Circus acting as tourist magnets.    The West London area is known for fashionable and expensive residential areas such as Notting Hill, Knightsbridge and Chelsea — where properties can sell for tens of millions of pounds.    The average price for all properties in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea is £894,000 with similar average outlay in most of Central London.

The eastern region of London contains the East End and East London. The East End is the area closest to the original Port of London, known for its high immigrant population, as well as for being one of the poorest areas in London.    The surrounding East London area saw much of London's early industrial development; now, brownfield sites throughout the area are being redeveloped as part of the Thames Gateway including the London Riverside and Lower Lea Valley, which is being developed into the Olympic Park for the 2012 Olympics.




With increasing industrialisation, London's population grew rapidly throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, and it was the most populous city in the world until overtaken by New York in 1925. Its population peaked at 8,615,245 in 1939 immediately before the outbreak of World War 2. There were an estimated 7,512,400 official residents in Greater London as of mid-2006.  However, London's continuous urban area extends beyond the borders of Greater London and was home to 8,278,251 people in 2001,  while its wider metropolitan area has a population of between 12 and 14 million depending on the definition used.  According to Eurostat, London is the most populous city and metropolitan area of the European Union and the second most populous in Europe (or third if Istanbul is included).

The region covers an area of  . The population density is  , more than ten times that of any other British region.    In terms of population, London is the 25th largest city and the 17th largest metropolitan region in the world. It is also ranked 4th in the world in number of billionaires (United States Dollars) residing in the city.    London ranks as one of the most expensive cities in the world, alongside Tokyo and Moscow.




According to 2008 estimates,    51% of these seven million and seven hundred thousand people people are classed as the indigenous White British, White Irish (2.5%) and "Other White" 10%, the majority of whom are other Europeans. 15% of people are of South Asian descent, including Indian (mainly Punjabi, Hindi, Tamil and Gujarati), Pakistani, Bangladeshi (Bengali) and "Other Asian" (mostly Sri Lankan (Tamil) and other Southern Asian ethnicities). 13% of people are Black (around 7% are Black African, 5% as Black Caribbean, 1% as "Other Black"). 5.5% are of mixed race; 1.5% are Chinese; and 1.5% of people belong to another ethnic group. 30% of inhabitants were born outside the European Union. The Irish born, from both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, number approximately 250,000 and are the largest group born outside of Britain.

In January 2005, a survey of London's ethnic and religious diversity claimed that there were more than 300 languages spoken and more than 50 non-indigenous communities which have a population of more than 10,000 in London.    Figures from the Office for National Statistics show that, as of 2006, London's foreign-born population is 2,288,000 (31%), up from 1,630,000 in 1997.    The 2001 census showed that 27.1% of Greater London's population were born outside the UK, and a slightly higher proportion were classed as non-white.

The table to the right shows the 'Country of Birth' of London residents in 2001, the date of the last UK Census. (Top 21).    Note that a portion of the German-born population are likely to be British nationals born to parents serving in the British armed forces in Germany.




Westminster Abbey is one of London's oldest and most important buildings and a World Heritage Site.
The majority of Londoners - 58.2% - identify themselves as Christians.    This is followed by those of no religion (15.8%), Muslims (8.5%), Hindus (4.1%), Jews (2.1%), Sikhs (1.5%), Buddhists (0.8%) and other (0.5%), though 8.7% of people did not answer this question in the 2001 Census.



London has traditionally been dominated by Christianity, and has a large number of churches, particularly in the City of London. The well-known St Paul's Cathedral in the City and Southwark Cathedral south of the river are Anglican administrative centres,    while the Archbishop of Canterbury, principal bishop of the Church of England and worldwide Anglican Communion, has his main residence at Lambeth Palace in the London Borough of Lambeth.

Important national and royal ceremonies are shared between St Paul's and Westminster Abbey.    The Abbey is not to be confused with nearby Westminster Cathedral, which is the largest Roman Catholic cathedral in England and Wales.    Religious practice is lower in London than any other part of the UK or Western Europe and is around seven times lower than American averages.    Despite the prevalence of Anglican churches, observance is very low within the Anglican denomination, although church attendance, particularly at evangelical Anglican churches in London, has started to increase.



The Swaminarayan Hindu Temple in Neasden
London is also home to sizeable Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, and Jewish communities. Many Muslims live in Tower Hamlets and Newham; the most important Muslim edifice is London Central Mosque on the edge of Regent's Park.    London's large Hindu community is found in the north-western boroughs of Harrow and Brent, the latter of which is home to one of Europe's largest Hindu temples, Neasden Temple.    Sikh communities are located in East and West London, which is also home to the largest Sikh temple in the world, outside India.

The majority of British Jews live in London, with significant Jewish communities in Stamford Hill, Stanmore, Golders Green, Hendon, and Edgware in North London.    Stanmore and Canons Park Synagogue has the largest membership of any single Orthodox synagogue in the whole of Europe, overtaking Ilford synagogue (also in London) in 1998.    The community set up the London Jewish Forum in 2007 in response to the growing significance of devolved London Government.




The City of London is the world's largest financial centre .    It is home to the London Stock Exchange and Lloyds of London.

London is a major centre for international business and commerce and is one of three "command centres" for the world economy (along with New York City and Tokyo).    According to 2005 estimates by the PricewaterhouseCoopers accounting firm, London has the 6th largest city economy in the world after Tokyo, New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Paris.    London generates approximately 20% of the UK's GDP  (or $446 billion in 2005); while the economy of the London metropolitan area — the second largest in Europe — generates approximately 30% of the UK's GDP (or an estimated $669 billion in 2005).

London's success as a service industry and business centre can be attributed to factors such as English being the native and dominant language of business, close relationship with the U.S. and various countries in Asia. Other factors include English law being the most important and most used contract law in international business and the multi-cultural infrastructure.    Government policies such as low taxes, particularly for foreigners (non-UK domiciled residents do not get taxed on their foreign earnings), a business friendly environment, good transport infrastructure and a deregulated economy with little intervention by the government have all contributed to London's economy becoming more service based.  Over 85% (3.2 million) of the employed population of Greater London works in service industries. Another half a million employees resident in Greater London work in manufacturing and construction, almost equally divided between both.

The three tallest skyscrapers as of 2008 in Canary Wharf as viewed from Cabot Square. It is home to such companies as HSBC and Clifford Chance.

London's largest industry remains finance, and its financial exports make it a large contributor to the UK's balance of payments. Over 300,000 people are employed in financial services in London. London has over 480 overseas banks, more than any other city in the world. Due to New York's tightening of market regulations, London stock exchanges had approximately 20% more initial public offerings in 2006.   
London is home to banks, brokers, insurers and legal and accounting firms. A second, smaller financial district is developing at Canary Wharf to the east of the city which includes the global headquarters of HSBC, Reuters, Barclays and the Magic Circle, which includes Clifford Chance, the largest law firm in the world. London handled 31% of global currency transactions   — an average daily turnover of US$753 billion — with more US dollars traded in London than New York, and more euros traded than in every other city in Europe combined.

More than half of the UK's top 100 listed companies (the FTSE 100) and over 100 of Europe's 500 largest companies are headquartered in central London. Over 70% of the FTSE 100 are located within London's metropolitan area, and 75% of Fortune 500 companies have offices in London.    Along with professional services, media companies are concentrated in London (see Media in London) and the media distribution industry is London's second most competitive sector (after central banking, the most competitive sector).    The BBC is a key employer, while other broadcasters also have headquarters around the city. Many national newspapers are edited in London, having traditionally been associated with Fleet Street in the city; they are now primarily based around Canary Wharf.

Due to its prominant global role, London is getting hit harder than any other financial centre in the subprime crisis. The City of London estimates that 70,000 jobs in finance will be cut within barely a year.   
Several foreign banks have started to move off employees from London to their national financial centres, notably Dresdner Kleinwort, BNP Paribas and Santander.

Tourism is one of London's prime industries and employs the equivalent of 350,000 full-time workers in London in 2003,    while annual expenditure by tourists is around £15 billion. " ", Visit London. Retrieved on 3 June 2006.  A study carried out by Euromonitor in October 2007 places London at first place out of 150 of the world's most popular cities, attracting 15.6 million international tourists in 2006.    This puts London far ahead of 2nd place Bangkok (10.35 million) and 3rd place Paris (just 9.7 million). London attracts 27 million overnight-stay visitors every year. " ", Visit London. Retrieved on 3 June 2006.  The Port of London is currently the third-largest in the United Kingdom, handling 50 million tonnes of cargo each year.




London is too diverse to be characterised by any particular architectural style, having accumulated its buildings over a long period of time and drawn on a wide range of influences. It is, however, mainly brick built, most commonly the yellow London stock brick or a warm orange-red variety, often decorated with carvings and white plaster mouldings.    Many grand houses and public buildings (such as the National Gallery) are constructed from Portland stone. Some areas of the city, particularly those just west of the centre, are characterised by white stucco or whitewashed buildings. Few structures pre-date the Great Fire of 1666, except for a few trace Roman remains, the Tower of London and a few scattered Tudor survivors in the City. The disused (but soon to be rejuvenated) 1939 Battersea Power Station by the river in the south-west is a local landmark, while some railway termini are excellent examples of Victorian architecture, most notably St Pancras and Paddington (at least internally).

The O 2 , one of the largest dome structures in the world.
The density of London varies, with high employment density in the central area, high residential densities in inner London and lower densities in the suburbs. In the dense areas, most of the concentration is achieved with medium- and high-rise buildings. London's skyscrapers such as the notable "Gherkin", Tower 42, the Broadgate Tower and One Canada Square are usually found in the two financial districts, the City of London and Canary Wharf. Other notable modern buildings include City Hall in Southwark with its distinctive oval shape,    the British Library in Somers Town/Kings Cross, What was formerly the Millennium Dome, located by the Thames to the east of Canary Wharf, is now used as an entertainment venue known as The O 2 .

The development of tall buildings has been encouraged in the London Plan, which will lead to the erection of many new skyscrapers over the next decade, particularly in the City of London and Canary Wharf. The 72-storey,   "Shard London Bridge" by London Bridge station, the   Bishopsgate Tower and many other skyscrapers over   are either proposed or approved and could transform the city's skyline. As of July 2008, there are 426 high-rise buildings (between 23 m to 150 m/75 ft to 491 ft) under construction, approved for construction, and proposed for construction in London.

A great many monuments pay homage to people and events in the city. The Monument in the City of London provides views of the surrounding area while commemorating the Great Fire of London, which originated nearby. Marble Arch and Wellington Arch, at the north and south ends of Park Lane respectively, have royal connections, as do the Albert Memorial and Royal Albert Hall in Kensington. Nelson's Column is a nationally recognised monument in Trafalgar Square, one of the focal points of the centre.




The largest parks in the central area of London are the Royal Parks of Hyde Park and its neighbour Kensington Gardens at the western edge of central London and Regent's Park on the northern edge.    This park contains London Zoo, the world's oldest scientific zoo, and is located near the tourist attraction of Madame Tussauds Wax Museum.       Closer to central London are the smaller Royal Parks of Green Park and St. James's Park.    Hyde Park in particular is popular for sports and sometimes hosts open-air concerts.

A number of large parks lie outside the city centre, including the remaining Royal Parks of Greenwich Park to the south-east    and Bushy Park and Richmond Park to the south-west,       as well as Victoria Park, East London to the east. Primrose Hill to the north of Regent's Park is a popular spot to view the city skyline. Some more informal, semi-natural open spaces also exist, including the   Hampstead Heath of North London. This incorporates Kenwood House, the former stately home and a popular location in the summer months where classical musical concerts are held by the lake, attracting thousands of people every weekend to enjoy the music, scenery and fireworks.



Traditionally the London accent has been given the famous Cockney label, and was similar to many accents of the South East of England, developing a unique form of slang known as Cockney Rhyming Slang. The accent of a 21st century Londoner varies widely; what is becoming more and more common amongst the under 30s however is some fusion of Cockney, Received Pronunciation, and a whole array of 'ethnic' accents, in particular Caribbean, which form an accent labelled Multicultural London English (MLE), with a large amount of slang in use as well.




Piccadilly Circus at night
The Trooping the Colour held in 2006 to mark the Queen's 80th birthday.
Within the City of Westminster, the entertainment district of the West End has its focus around Leicester Square, where London and world film premieres are held, and Piccadilly Circus, with its giant electronic advertisements.    London's theatre district is here, as are many cinemas, bars, clubs and restaurants, including the city's Chinatown district, and just to the east is Covent Garden, an area housing speciality shops. The United Kingdom's Royal Ballet,English National Ballet, Royal Opera and English National Opera are based in London and perform at the Royal Opera House, The London Coliseum, Sadler's Wells Theatre and the Royal Albert Hall as well as touring the country.    Islington's   long Upper Street, extending Northwards from The Angel, has more bars and restaurants than any other street in the UK.    Europe's busiest shopping area is Oxford Street, a shopping street nearly   long — which makes it the longest shopping street in the world — and home to many shops and department stores including Selfridges.    Knightsbridge — home to the Harrods department store — lies just to the southwest. London is home to designers Vivienne Westwood, Galliano, Stella McCartney, Manolo Blahnik, and Jimmy Choo among others; its renowned art and fashion schools make it an international centre of fashion alongside Paris, Milan and New York.

London offers a great variety of cuisine as a result of its ethnically diverse population. Gastronomic centres include the Bangladeshi restaurants of Brick Lane and the Chinese food restaurants of Chinatown.

There are a variety of regular annual events in the city. The beginning of the year is celebrated with the relatively new New Year's Day Parade, while traditional parades include November's Lord Mayor's Show, a centuries-old event celebrating the annual appointment of a new Lord Mayor of the City of London with a procession along the streets of the City, and June's Trooping the Colour, a formal military pageant performed by regiments of the Commonwealth and British armies to celebrate the Queen's Official Birthday.




Charles Dickens (1812–1870), whose works formed a pervasive image of Victorian London.

London has been the setting for many works of literature. Two writers closely associated with the city are the diarist Samuel Pepys, noted for his eyewitness account of the Great Fire, and Charles Dickens, whose representation of a foggy, snowy, grimy London of street sweepers and pickpockets has been a major influence on people's vision of early Victorian London.    The earlier (1722) A Journal of the Plague Year by Daniel Defoe is a fictionalisation of the events of the 1665 Great Plague.  William Shakespeare spent a large part of his life living and working in London; his contemporary Ben Jonson was also based in London, and some of his work — most notably his play The Alchemist — was set in the city.  Later important depictions of London from the 19th and early 20th centuries are the afore-mentioned Dickens novels, and Arthur Conan Doyle's illustrious Sherlock Holmes stories.  A modern writer pervasively influenced by the city is Peter Ackroyd, in works such as London: The Biography, The Lambs of London and Hawksmoor.

London has played a significant role in the film industry, and has major studios at Pinewood, Ealing, Shepperton, Elstree and Leavesden, as well as an important special effects and post-production community centred in Soho in central London. Working Title Films has its headquarters in London.    The city also hosts a number of performing arts schools, including The Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), the Central School of Speech and Drama (alumni: Judi Dench and Laurence Olivier) and the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art (alumni: Jim Broadbent). The London Film Festival is held each year in October.



London is home to many museums, galleries, and other institutions which are major tourist attractions as well as playing a research role. The Natural History Museum (biology and geology), Science Museum and Victoria and Albert Museum (fashion and design) are clustered in South Kensington's "museum quarter", while the British Museum houses historic artefacts from around the world.    The British Library at St Pancras is the UK's national library, housing 150 million items. The city also houses extensive art collections, primarily in the National Gallery,    Tate Britain    and Tate Modern.



The Royal Albert Hall hosts a wide range of concerts and musical events.

London is one of the major classical and popular music capitals of the world and is home to major music corporations, such as EMI and Decca Records, as well as countless bands, musicians and industry professionals. London is home to many orchestras and concert halls such as the Barbican Arts Centre (principal base of the London Symphony Orchestra), Cadogan Hall (Royal Philharmonic Orchestra) and the Royal Albert Hall (BBC Promenade Concerts).  London's two main opera houses are the Royal Opera House and the Coliseum Theatre.

Several conservatoires are located within the city: Royal Academy of Music, Royal College of Music, Guildhall School of Music and Drama, and Trinity College of Music.

London has numerous renowned venues for rock and pop concerts, including large arenas such as Earls Court, Wembley Arena and the O2 Arena, as well as numerous mid-size venues, such as Brixton Academy, Hammersmith Apollo and The London Astoria.  London also hosts many music festivals, including the 02 Wireless Festival and Latitude Festival.

London is home to the first and original Hard Rock Cafe and the illustrious Abbey Road Studios where The Beatles created many of their hits. Musicians such as Bob Marley, Jimi Hendrix and Freddie Mercury have lived in London. A large number of musical artists originate from or are most strongly associated with London, including David Bowie, Ian Dury, The Kinks, Adam Faith, The Rolling Stones, The Who, Madness, The Jam, Blur, Iron Maiden, Phil Collins, Rod Stewart, Elvis Costello, Dusty Springfield, The Yardbirds and The Small Faces.        
  London was instrumental in the development of punk music,  with figures such as the Sex Pistols, The Clash,  and Vivienne Westwood all based in the city.

More recent artists to emerge from the London music scene include The Libertines, one of the most influential British rock acts of the 2000s,    Bloc Party, Amy Winehouse, Lily Allen, The Kooks, Razorlight, Laura Marling, Dizzee Rascal, Natasha Bedingfield and Leona Lewis.

London is also a centre for Urban music. In particular the genres UK Garage, Drum and Bass and Grime evolved in the city from the foreign genres of hiphop and reggae, alongside local rave music. Black music station BBC 1Xtra was set up to support the rise of homegrown urban music both in London and the rest of the UK.




Wembley Stadium is home to English football and is the most expensive stadium in the world.   
The Wimbledon Championships, a tennis Grand Slam tournament.

London has hosted the Summer Olympics twice, in 1908 and 1948.       In July 2005 London was chosen to host the Games in 2012, which will make it the first city in the world to host the Summer Olympics three times.    London was also the host of the British Empire Games in 1934.

London's most popular sport (for both participants and spectators) is football. London has thirteen League football clubs, including five in the Premier League: Arsenal, Chelsea, Fulham, Tottenham Hotspur and West Ham United.    London also has four rugby union teams in the Guinness Premiership (London Irish, Saracens, Wasps and Harlequins), although only the Harlequins play in London (all the other three now play outside Greater London, although Saracens still play within the M25).    There are two professional rugby league clubs in London - Harlequins Rugby League who play in the Super League at the Stoop and the National League 2 side the London Skolars (based in Haringey).

Since 1924, the original Wembley Stadium was the home of the English national football team, and served as the venue for the FA Cup final as well as rugby league's Challenge Cup final.    The new Wembley Stadium serves exactly the same purposes and has a capacity of 90,000.    Twickenham Stadium in west London is the national rugby union stadium, and has a capacity of 84,000 now that the new south stand has been completed.

Cricket in London centres on its two Test cricket grounds at Lord's (home of Middlesex C.C.C) in St John's Wood,    and The Oval (home of Surrey C.C.C) in Kennington.    One of London's best-known annual sports competitions is the Wimbledon Tennis Championships, held at the All England Club in the south-western suburb of Wimbledon.    Other key events are the annual mass-participation London Marathon which sees some 35,000 runners attempt a   course around the city,    and the Oxford vs. Cambridge Boat Race on the River Thames between Putney and Mortlake.




Transport is one of the four areas of policy administered by the Mayor of London,    however the mayor's financial control is limited and he does not control the heavy rail network, although in November 2007 he assumed responsibility for the North London Railway as well as several other lines, to form London Overground.    The public transport network, administered by Transport for London (TfL), is one of the most extensive in the world, but faces congestion and reliability issues, which a large investment programme is attempting to address, including £7 billion (€10 billion) of improvements planned for the Olympics.    London has been commended as the city with the best public transport.    Cycling is an increasingly popular way to get around London. The London Cycling Campaign lobbies for better provision.



The London Underground is the oldest, longest, and most expansive metro system in the world, dating from 1863.

The centrepiece of the public transport network is the London Underground — commonly referred to as The Tube — which has eleven interconnecting lines. It is the oldest, longest, and most expansive metro system in the world, dating from 1863.   The system was home to the world's first underground electric line, the City & South London Railway, which began service in 1890.    Over three million journeys a day are made on the Underground network, nearly 1 billion journeys each year.    The Underground serves the central area and most suburbs to the north of the Thames, while those to the south are served by an extensive suburban rail surface network.

The Docklands Light Railway is a second metro system using smaller and lighter trains, which opened in 1987, serving East London and Greenwich on both sides of the Thames. Commuter and intercity railways generally do not cross the city, instead running into fourteen terminal stations scattered around its historic centre; the exception is the Thameslink route operated by First Capital Connect, with terminus stations at Bedford, Brighton and Moorgate.    Since the early 1990s, increasing pressures on the commuter rail and Underground networks have led to increasing demands — particularly from businesses and the City of London Corporation — for Crossrail: a £10 billion east – west heavy rail connection under central London, which was given the green light in early October 2007.

High-speed Eurostar trains link St Pancras International with Lille and Paris in France, and Brussels in Belgium. Journey times to Paris and Brussels of 2h 15 and 1h 51 respectively make London closer to continental Europe than the rest of Britain by virtue of the newly completed High Speed 1 rail link to the Channel Tunnel.    From 2009 this line will also allow for high speed domestic travel from Kent into London. The redevelopment of St. Pancras was key to London's Olympic bid, as the station also serves two international airports through Thameslink, and will also provide direct rail links to the Olympic site at Stratford using British Rail Class 395 trains running under the Olympic Javelin name; these will be based on Japanese Shinkansen high-speed trains.



The modern Enviro400 double-decker bus
London's bus network is one of the largest in the world, running 24 hours a day, with 8,000 buses, 700 bus routes, and over 6 million passenger journeys made every weekday. In 2003, the network's ridership was estimated at over 1.5 billion passenger trips per annum, more than the Underground.    Around £850 m is taken in revenue each year.

London has the largest wheelchair accessible network in the world    and, from the 3rd quarter of 2007, became more accessible to hearing and visually impaired passengers as audio-visual announcements were introduced. The distinctive red double-decker buses are internationally recognised, and are a trademark of London transport along with black cabs and the Tube.



Terminal 5 at Heathrow Airport, which is the world's busiest airport by international passenger traffic.
London is a major international air transport hub with the largest city airspace in the world. Eight airports use the words London Airport in their name, but most traffic passes through one of five major airports. London Heathrow Airport is the busiest airport in the world for international traffic, and is the major hub of the nation's flag carrier, British Airways.    In March 2008 its fifth terminal was opened,    and plans are already being considered for a sixth terminal.    Similar traffic, with the addition of some low-cost short-haul flights, is also handled at London Gatwick Airport.    London Stansted Airport and London Luton Airport cater mostly for low-cost short-haul flights.       London City Airport, the smallest and most central airport, is focused on business travellers, with a mixture of full service short-haul scheduled flights and considerable business jet traffic.



Although the majority of journeys involving central London are made by public transport, travel in outer London is car-dominated. The inner ring road (around the city centre), the North and South Circular roads (in the suburbs), and the outer orbital motorway (the M25, outside the built-up area) encircle the city and are intersected by a number of busy radial routes — but very few motorways penetrate into inner London. The M25 is the longest ring-road motorway in the world at   long.    A plan for a comprehensive network of motorways throughout the city (the Ringways Plan) was prepared in the 1960s but was mostly cancelled in the early 1970s. In 2003, a congestion charge was introduced to reduce traffic volumes in the city centre. With a few exceptions, motorists are required to pay £8 per day to drive within a defined zone encompassing much of congested central London.       Motorists who are residents of the defined zone can buy a vastly reduced season pass which is renewed monthly and is cheaper than a corresponding bus fare.




Royal Holloway, as a part of the University of London, a federation of London higher education institutions
Home to a range of universities, colleges and schools, London has a student population of about 378,000 and is a centre of research and development. Most primary and secondary schools in London follow the same system as the rest of England — comprehensive schooling.

With 125,000 students, the University of London is the largest contact teaching university in the United Kingdom and in Europe.    It comprises 20 colleges as well as several smaller institutes each with a high degree of autonomy. Constituent colleges have their own admissions procedures, and are effectively universities in their own right, although most degrees are awarded by the University of London rather than the individual colleges. Its constituents include multi-disciplinary colleges such as UCL,    King's, Goldsmiths, Queen Mary    and more specialised institutions such as the London School of Economics,    SOAS,    the Royal Academy of Music,    the Courtauld Institute of Art and the Institute of Education.

Imperial College London and University College London have been ranked among the top ten universities in the world by The Times Higher Education Supplement: in 2008 Imperial was ranked the 6th best and UCL the 7th best university in the world.

In addition, the London School of Economics is the world‘s leading social science institution for teaching and research, plus has the most international student body of any university in the world today.

A number of colleges are dedicated to the fine arts, including the Royal College of Music, Royal College of Art, and Guildhall School of Music and Drama.

Senate House, the headquarters of the federal University of London
London's other universities, such as Brunel University, City University, London Metropolitan University, Middlesex University, University of East London, University of the Arts London, University of Westminster, Kingston University and London South Bank University are not part of the University of London but are still leaders in their field and popular choices among students both nationally and internationally. Some were polytechnics until these were granted university status in 1992, and others which were founded much earlier. Imperial College London left the federal University of London in 2007. Since the merger of University of North London and London Guildhall University in 2003, London Metropolitan University is the largest unitary university in the capital, with over 34,000 students from 155 countries.  About London Met London Metropolitan University, August 2008  London is also known globally for its business education, with the London Business School (ranked 1st in Europe — Business Week)    and Cass Business School (Europe's largest finance school) both being top world-rated business schools.    In addition there are three international universities: Schiller International University, Richmond University and Regent's College.




There are 46 other places on six continents named after London. Jack Malvern.  Richmond, in Surrey, is the most widely copied British place name worldwide, timesonline 2008-12-29. The original byline for the article in The Times of the same day was "The 55 corners of foreign fields that will be for ever ... Richmond" (page 9). Cites The Times Universal Atlas of the World.  As well as London's twinning, the Boroughs of London have twinnings with parts of other cities across the world. Shown below is the list of cities that the Greater London Authority is twinned with.
* New York City,  
* Moscow,  
* Berlin,

The following cities have a friendship agreement with London:
* Sofia,  
* Delhi,  
* Mumbai,  
* Beijing,  
* Istanbul,

* Paris,  
* Tehran,  
* Tokyo,  
* Bogotá,  
* Podgorica,  
* Algiers,



* Global city
* Geography of England
* Large Cities Climate Leadership Group
* Largest European cities and metropolitan areas
* London Assembly
* Megacity



*  
*  
*




*  
*  Mayor of London, London Assembly and the Greater London Authority – Official city government site
*  Transport for London (TfL) – city transport authority
*  BBC London
*  Office for National Statistics: Focus on London 2007 – compendium of official statistics about London
*  Museum of London Group Portal - Home
*  VisitLondon.com – Official London site
*  Map of Early Modern London – Historical Map and Encyclopaedia of Shakespeare's London (Scholarly)
*  London Bridges – A view of London Bridges over the River Thames


Beijing



(  or   in English; Chinese:  ; pinyin: Běijīng;  ; Wade-Giles: Peiching or Pei-ching) (also formerly known in English as Peking (   or  )) is a metropolis in northern China and the capital of the People's Republic of China. It is one of the four municipalities of the PRC, which are equivalent to provinces in China's administrative structure.  The municipality of Beijing borders Hebei Province to the north, west, south, and for a small section in the east, and Tianjin Municipality to the southeast.     Beijing is one of the Four Great Ancient Capitals of China.

Beijing is China's second largest city, after Shanghai.  Beijing is a major transportation hub, with dozens of railways, roads and motorways passing through the city. It is also the focal point of many international flights to China. Beijing is recognised as the political, educational, and cultural center of the People's Republic of China,    while Shanghai and Hong Kong predominate in economic fields.           The city hosted the 2008 Olympic Games.

Few cities in the world besides Beijing have served as the political and cultural centre of an area as immense as China for so long.    The Encyclopædia Britannica describes it as, "One of the world's great cities,"    and declares that the city has been an integral part of China’s history for centuries, and there is scarcely a major building of any age in Beijing that doesn't have at least some national historical significance.  Beijing is renowned for its opulent palaces, temples, and huge stone walls and gates.    Its art treasures and universities have long made the city a centre of culture and art in China.



Beijing or Peking ( ) means "northern capital", in line with the common East Asian tradition whereby capital cities are explicitly named as such. Other cities that are similarly named include Nanjing ( ), China, meaning "southern capital"; Tokyo ( ), Japan, and Đông Kinh ( , now Hanoi), Vietnam, both meaning "eastern capital"; as well as Kyoto ( ), Japan, and ( ; now Seoul), Korea, both meaning simply "capital".

Peking is the name of the city according to Chinese Postal Map Romanization, and the traditional customary name for Beijing in English (passports issued by the British Embassy are still printed as being issued by the "British Embassy, Peking"). The term Peking originated with French missionaries four hundred years ago and corresponds to an older pronunciation predating a subsequent sound change in Mandarin from   to   Coblin, W. South. "A Brief History of Mandarin." Journal of the American Oriental Society 120, no. 4 (2000): 537-52.  (  is represented in pinyin as j, as in Beijing). It is still used in many languages.

The pronunciation "Peking" is also closer to the Fujianese dialect of Amoy or Min Nan spoken in the city of Xiamen, a port where European traders first landed in the 16th century, while "Beijing" more closely approximates the Mandarin dialect's pronunciation. 1997 CNN interview with the last British colonial governor of Hong Kong Chris Patten

The city has been renamed several times. During the Jin Dynasty, the city was known as Zhongdu ( ) , and then later under the Mongol Yuan Dynasty as Dadu ( ) in Chinese    and Daidu to Mongols Denis Twitchett, Herbert Franke, John K. Fairbank, in The Cambridge History of China: Volume 6, Alien Regimes and Border States (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), p 454.  (also recorded as Cambuluc    by Marco Polo). Twice in the city's history, the name was changed from Beijing (Peking) to Beiping (Peiping) (  Pinyin: Beiping; Wade-Giles: Pei-p'ing), literally "Northern Peace". This occurred first under the Hongwu Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, and again in 1928 with the Kuomintang (KMT) government of the Republic of China.  On each occasion, the name change removed the element meaning "capital" (jing or king,  ) to reflect the fact the national capital had changed to Nanjing. The city's name was also twice changed from Beiping (Peiping) to Beijing (Peking). This occurred first under the Yongle Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, who moved the capital from Nanjing back to Beijing, and again in 1949, when the Communist Party of China restored Beijing as China's capital after the founding of the People's Republic of China.

Yanjing ( ; Pinyin: Yānjīng; Wade-Giles: Yen-ching) is and has been another popular informal name for Beijing, a reference to the ancient State of Yan that existed here during the Zhou Dynasty. This name is reflected in the locally brewed Yanjing Beer as well as Yenching University, an institution of higher learning that was merged into Peking University.

: The history section below outlines other historical names of Beijing.



Zhoukoudian
The earliest remnants of human habitation in the Beijing municipality are found in the caves of Dragon Bone Hill near the village of Zhoukoudian in Fangshan District, where the Peking Man lived. Homo erectus fossils from the caves date to 230,000 to 250,000 years ago. Paleolithic homo sapiens also lived there about 27,000 years ago.    There were cities in the vicinities of Beijing by the 1st millennium BC, and the capital of the State of Yan, one of the powers of the Warring States Period (473-221 BC), Ji (薊/蓟), was established in present-day Beijing.

After the fall of the Yan, the subsequent Qin, Han, and Jin dynasties set up local prefectures in the area.  In Tang Dynasty it became the headquarters for Fanyang jiedushi, the virtual military governor of current northern Hebei area. The An Shi Rebellion was also launched from here in 755 AD.



The Pagoda of Tianning Temple, at 13 stories and 57.8 m (189 ft) in height, built in 1120 during the Liao Dynasty

In 936, the Later Jin Dynasty (936-947) of northern China ceded a large part of its northern frontier, including modern Beijing, to the Khitan Liao Dynasty. In 938, the Liao Dynasty set up a secondary capital in what is now Beijing, and called it Nanjing (the "Southern Capital"). In 1125, the Jurchen Jin Dynasty conquered Liao, and in 1153 moved its capital to Liao's Nanjing, calling it Zhongdu (中都), the "central capital."  Zhongdu was situated in what is now the area centered around Tianningsi, slightly to the southwest of central Beijing. Some of the oldest existing relics in Beijing, such as the Tianning Temple, date to the Liao era.

Mongol forces burned Zhongdu to the ground in 1215.    Later in 1264, in preparation for the conquest of all of China to establish the Yuan Dynasty, Kublai Khan decided to rebuild it slightly north to the center of the Jin capital, Brian Hook, Beijing and Tianjin: Towards a Millennial Megalopolis, p 2  and in 1272, he made this city his capital as Dadu (大都, Chinese for "great capital"),  or Daidu to the Mongols, otherwise spelled as Cambaluc or Cambuluc in Marco Polo's accounts. Construction of Dadu finished in 1293.  The decision of Kublai Khan greatly enhanced the status of a city that had been situated on the northern fringe of China proper. The center of Dadu was situated slightly north of modern central Beijing. It centered on what is now the northern stretch of the 2nd Ring Road, and stretched northwards to between the 3rd and 4th Ring Roads. There are remnants of the Yuan-era wall still standing, and they are known as the Tucheng (土城 literally, the 'earth wall').



In 1368, Zhu Yuanzhang, the founder of the Ming Dynasty and future Hongwu Emperor, made his imperial ambitions known by sending an army toward the Yuan capital. The last Yuan emperor fled north to Shangdu and Zhu declared the founding of the Ming Dynasty after razing the Yuan palaces in Dadu to the ground. Ebrey, Patricia Buckley. The Cambridge Illustrated History of China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. ISBN=0-521-66991-X  The city was renamed to Beiping (北平), or "northern peace" in the same year, Susan Naquin, Peking: Temples and City Life, 1400-1900'', p xxxiii  and Shuntian (順天) prefecture was established in the area around the city.    In 1403, the new (and third) Ming emperor - the Yongle Emperor - renamed this city to Beijing (北京), or "northern capital",  and designated Beijing to be the co-capital alongside the (then) current capital of Nanjing. Beijing was the subject of a major construction project for a new Imperial residence, the Forbidden City that lasted nearly 15 years (1406 to 1420).  When the palace was finished, the Yongle Emperor ceremoniously took up residence. From 1421 onwards, Beijing, also known as Jingshi (京师),  was the "official" capital of the Ming Dynasty while Nanjing was demoted to the status of "secondary" capital. This system of dual capitals (with Beijing being vastly more important) continued for the duration of the Ming Dynasty. Thirteen of the sixteen Ming Emperors are buried in elaborate tombs near Beijing.
A corner tower of the Forbidden City
By the 15th century, Beijing had essentially taken its current shape, and the Ming-era city wall served as the Beijing city wall until modern times, when it was pulled down and the 2nd Ring Road was built in its place.    It is believed that Beijing was the largest city in the world from 1425 to 1650 and from 1710 to 1825.    Other notable buildings constructed during the Ming period include the Temple of Heaven (built by 1420).    The Tiananmen Gate, now a state symbol of the People's Republic of China and featured on its emblem, was first built in 1420, and rebuilt several times later. Tiananmen Square was built in 1651 and enlarged in 1958.    Jesuits finished building the first Beijing-area Roman Catholic church in 1652 at the Xuanwu Gate, where Italian Jesuit Matteo Ricci lived; the modern Nantang (南堂, Southern Cathedral) has been built over the original cathedral.

The end of the Ming came in 1644 when, for 40 days, Li Zicheng's peasant army captured Beijing and overthrew the Ming government. When the powerful Manchu army arrived at the outskirts of the city, Li and his followers abandoned the city and as a result the Manchu forces, under Prince Dorgon, captured Beijing without a fight.

Prince Dorgon established the Qing Dynasty as a direct successor to the Ming, and Beijing remained China's capital.    The Qing Emperors made some modifications to the Imperial residence, but in large part, the Ming buildings and the general layout remained unchanged. Beijing at this time was also known as Jingshi, which corresponded to the Manchu Gemun Hecen with the same meaning.    The classic Chinese novel Dream of the Red Chamber is set in Beijing during the early years of Qing rule (the end of the 1600s).

Beijing's Temple of Heaven as photographed in the early 20th century

At the end of Qing period, Beijing was the scene of the siege of the foreign legations during the Boxer Rebellion in 1900.    Some important Imperial structures in the city were destroyed during the fighting, including the Hanlin Academy and the Summer Palace.



The Xinhai Revolution of 1911, aimed at replacing Qing rule with a republic, originally intended to establish its capital at Nanjing. After high-ranking Qing official Yuan Shikai forced the abdication of the Qing emperor in Beijing and ensured the success of the revolution, the revolutionaries in Nanjing accepted that Yuan should be the president of the new Republic of China, and that the capital should remain at Beijing. Yuan gradually consolidated power and became by 1915 the new emperor but died less than a year into his reign.    China then fell under the control of regional warlords, and the most powerful factions fought frequent wars (the Zhili-Anhui War, the First Zhili-Fengtian War, and the Second Zhili-Fengtian War) to take control of the capital at Beijing.
Following the success of the Kuomintang (KMT)'s Northern Expedition, which pacified the warlords of the north, Nanjing was officially made the capital of the Republic of China in 1928, and Beijing was renamed Beiping (Peip'ing) (北平) on 28 June that year,    in English meaning "northern peace" or "north pacified".  During the Second Sino-Japanese War,  Beiping fell to Japan on 29 July 1937,    and was made the seat of the Provisional Government of the Republic of China, a puppet state that ruled the ethnic Chinese portions of Japanese-occupied northern China;    the government was later merged into the larger Wang Jingwei Government based in Nanjing.



Mao Zedong proclaiming the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949
A man stands before a column of tanks which were sent to Tiananmen Square earlier to suppress the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
On 31 January 1949, during the Chinese Civil War, Communist forces entered Beiping without a fight. On 1 October of the same year, the Communist Party of China, under the leadership of Mao Zedong, announced in Tiananmen the creation of the People's Republic of China and renamed the city back to Beijing.    Just a few days earlier, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference had decided that Beijing would be the capital of the new government.

At the time of the founding of the People's Republic, Beijing Municipality consisted of just its urban area and immediate suburbs. The urban area was divided into many small districts inside what is now the 2nd Ring Road. The Beijing city wall was torn down to make way for the construction of the 2nd Ring Road, which was finished by 1981 in accord with the 1982 city plan. That road was the first of a series of new ring roads intended for automobiles rather than for bicycles.

Following the economic reforms of Deng Xiaoping, the urban area of Beijing has expanded greatly. Formerly within the confines of the 2nd Ring Road and the 3rd Ring Road, the urban area of Beijing is now pushing at the limits of the recently constructed 5th Ring Road and 6th Ring Road, with many areas that were formerly farmland now developed residential or commercial districts.    According to a 2005 newspaper report, the size of the newly developed Beijing land was one and a half times larger than the land of old Beijing within the 2nd Ring Road.    Wangfujing and Xidan have developed into flourishing shopping districts,    while Zhongguancun has become a major centre of electronics in China.    In recent years, the expansion of Beijing has also brought to the forefront some problems of urbanization, such as heavy traffic, poor air quality, the loss of historic neighbourhoods, and significant influx of migrants from various regions of the country, especially rural areas.

On 13 July 2001, the International Olympic Committee selected Beijing as the host for the 2008 Summer Olympics.




Beihai Park, an extensive imperial garden in the center of Beijing 
The Beijing Botanical Garden
Beijing is situated at the northern tip of the roughly triangular North China Plain, which opens to the south and east of the city. Mountains to the north, northwest and west shield the city and northern China's agricultural heartland from the encroaching desert steppes. The northwestern part of the municipality, especially Yanqing County and Huairou District, are dominated by the Jundu Mountains, while the western part of the municipality is framed by the Xishan Mountains. The Great Wall of China, which stretches across the northern part of Beijing Municipality, made use of this rugged topography to defend against nomadic incursions from the steppes. Mount Dongling in the Xishan ranges and on the border with Hebei is the municipality's highest point, with an altitude of 2303 m. Major rivers flowing through the municipality include the Yongding River and the Chaobai River, part of the Hai River system, and flow in a southerly direction. Beijing is also the northern terminus of the Grand Canal of China which was built across the North China Plain to Hangzhou. Miyun Reservoir, built on the upper reaches of the Chaobai River, is Beijing's largest reservoir, and crucial to its water supply.

The urban area of Beijing is situated in the south-central part of the municipality and occupies a small but expanding part of the municipality's area. It spreads out in bands of concentric ring roads, of which the fifth and outermost, the Sixth Ring Road (the numbering starts at 2), passes through several satellite towns. Tian'anmen (Gate of Heavenly Peace) and Tian'anmen Square are at the centre of Beijing, and are directly to the south of the Forbidden City, former residence of the emperors of China. To the west of Tian'anmen is Zhongnanhai, residence of the paramount leaders of the People's Republic of China. Running through central Beijing from east to west is Chang'an Avenue, one of Beijing's main thoroughfares.

The city's climate is a monsoon-influenced humid continental climate (Koppen climate classification Dwa), characterised by hot, humid summers due to the East Asian monsoon, and generally cold, windy, dry winters that reflect the influence of the vast Siberian anticyclone.  Average temperatures in January are at around 1 °C (33°F), while average temperatures in July are around 30°C (87 °F). The highest temperature ever recorded was 42 °C and the lowest recorded was -27 °C.    In 2005, the total precipitation was 410.77 mm; the majority of it occurred in the summer.



Air pollution levels on an average day in Beijing are nearly five times above World Health Organization standards for safety.    Joint research between United States and Chinese researchers in 2006 concluded that a lot of the city's pollution comes from surrounding cities and provinces. According to the research, 34% of PM 2.5  and on average 35-60% of ozone can be traced to sources outside the city. Shandong Province and Tianjin Municipality have a "significant influence on Beijing's air quality." David G. Streetsa, Joshua S. Fub, Carey J. Jangc, Jiming Haod, Kebin Hed,
Xiaoyan Tange, Yuanhang Zhange, Zifa Wangf, Zuopan Lib, Qiang Zhanga,
Litao Wangd, Binyu Wangc, Carolyne Yua, Air quality during the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games accessed 8/16/08 
Heavy air pollution has resulted in widespread smog.  This photo, taken in August 2005, shows the contrasting air quality in Beijing in days of difference
In preparation for the 2008 Summer Olympics and after promising to cleanup the city's air, nearly US$17 billion was spent to clean the air, and Beijing had implemented a number of air improvement schemes for the duration of the games. This included stopping work on all construction sites, closing many factories both in and around Beijing, closing some gas stations,    and cutting motor traffic by half.    Two new subway lines were opened and thousands of old taxis and buses were replaced to encourage residents to use public transport. The Beijing government encouraged a discussion to keep the odd-even scheme in place after the Olympics,    and although the scheme was eventually lifted on 21 September 2008, it was replaced by new restrictions on government vehicles    and a new restriction making car owners use public transport once a week based on their license plate, coming into force in October.  Post-Olympics Beijing car restrictions to take effect next month  In addition to the vehicle restrictions, staggered office hours and retail opening times have been encouraged to avoid the rush hour, parking fees increased, and 357,000 "yellow label" vehicles — those that have too high emission levels — will be banned in Beijing altogether from January.

According to the United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP), China has spent 17 billion  over the last three years on a large scale green drive. Beijing has added 3,800 natural gas buses, the largest fleet in the world. Twenty percent of the Olympic venues' electricity comes from renewable energy sources. Muqbil, IMTIAZ, Golden effort maligned,Bangkok Post, 8/17/2008, from  accessed 8/21/2008   The city has also planted hundreds of thousands of trees and increased green space in an effort to make the city more livable.



Dust from erosion of deserts in northern and northwestern China results in seasonal dust storms that plague the city; the Beijing Weather Modification Office sometimes artificially induces rainfall to fight such storms and mitigate their effects.    In the first four months of 2006 alone, there were no fewer than eight such storms.    In April 2002, one dust storm alone dumped nearly 50,000 tons of dust onto the city before moving on to Japan and Korea.



The popular student hangout, Wudaokou, in northwestern Beijing at night 
Bookshops in the Xidan area
Chaoyang Park in Beijing's Chaoyang District
Shichahai, located in the Xicheng District, is traditionally one of Beijing's most beautiful and charming scenic areas
Major neighbourhoods in urban Beijing include the following. Neighbourhoods may overlap across multiple districts (see below):

Several place names in Beijing end with mén ( ), meaning "gate", as they were the locations of gates in the former Beijing city wall. Other place names end in cūn ( ), meaning "village", as they were originally villages outside the city wall.

Beijing's 18 districts and counties are further subdivided into 273 lower (third)-level administrative units at the township level: 119 towns, 24 townships, 5 ethnic townships and 125 subdistricts.



Inside the Forbidden City 
Three styles of architecture predominate in urban Beijing. First, the traditional architecture of imperial China, perhaps best exemplified by the massive Tian'anmen (Gate of Heavenly Peace), which remains the People's Republic of China's trademark edifice, the Forbidden City, the Imperial Ancestral Temple and the Temple of Heaven. Next there is what is sometimes referred to as the "Sino-Sov" style, built between the 1950s and the 1970s, with structures tending to be boxy, bland, and poorly made.    Finally, there are much more modern architectural forms — most noticeably in the area of the Beijing CBD and Beijing Financial Street.

Beijing of the early 21st century has witness tremendous growth of new building constructions, showing various modern styles from international designers. A mixture of both old and new styles of architecture can be seen at the 798 Art Zone, which mixes 1950s design with a blend of the new.




Municipal government is regulated by the local Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in issuing administrative orders, collecting taxes, and operating the economy. The local party authority is headed by the Beijing CPC Secretary (北京市委书记). The local CCP also directs a standing committee of the Municipal People's Congress in making policy decisions and overseeing local government. Local government figures include a mayor, vice-mayor, and numerous bureaus focusing on law, public security, and other affairs. Additionally, as the capital of China, Beijing houses all the important national governmental and political institutions, including the National People's Congress.



Beijing's CBD with Jianwai SOHO, Yintai, CCTV Headquarters, Jingguang
Beijing Financial Street, the economic centre of Beijing
Wangfujing Street is one of the busiest streets in Beijing, with nearly 100,000 visitors daily (August 2008).
Zhongguancun is a technology hub in Haidian District
Beijing is amongst the most developed cities in China with tertiary industry accounting for 71.3% of its GDP, making it the first post industrial city in mainland China.     Financial industry is one of the most important industries of Beijing.    By the end of 2007, there are 751 financial organizations in Beijing that generated 128.6 billion RMB revenue accounting for 11.6% of the total financial industry revenue of the entire country. It is also accounts for 13.8% of Beijing's GDP, the highest percentage of that of all Chinese cities.

In 2007, Beijing's nominal GDP was 900.62 billion RMB (118.4 billion USD), a year-on-year growth of 12.3% from the previous year. Its GDP per capita was 56,044 RMB, an increase of 8.9% from the previous year. In 2007, Beijing's primary, secondary, and tertiary industries were worth 10.13 billion RMB, 247.93 billion RMB, and 642.56 billion RMB. In 2007, Urban disposable income per capita was 21,989 yuan, a real increase of 11.2% from the previous year. Per capita pure income of rural residents was 9,559 RMB, a real increase of 8.2%.    Per capita disposable income of the 20% low-income residents increased 16.7%, 11.4 percentage points higher than the growth rate of the 20% high-income residents. The Engel's coefficient of Beijing's urban residents reached 31.8% in 2005 and that of the rural residents was 32.8%, declining 4.5 percentage points and 3.9 percentage points, respectively, compared with 2000.

Beijing's real estate and automobile sectors have continued to boom in recent years. In 2005, a total of 28.032 million square metres of housing real estate was sold, for a total of 175.88 billion RMB. The total number of cars registered in Beijing in 2004 was 2,146,000, of which 1,540,000 were privately owned (a year-on-year increase of 18.7%).

The Beijing CBD, centred at the Guomao area, has been identified as the city's new central business district, and is home to a variety of corporate regional headquarters, shopping precincts, and high-end housing. The Beijing Financial Street, in the Fuxingmen and Fuchengmen area, is a traditional financial centre. The Wangfujing and Xidan areas are major shopping districts. Zhongguancun, dubbed "China's Silicon Valley", continues to be a major centre in electronics- and computer-related industries, as well as pharmaceuticals-related research. Meanwhile, Yizhuang, located to the southeast of the urban area, is becoming a new centre in pharmaceuticals, IT, and materials engineering.    Urban Beijing is also known for being a centre of pirated goods and anything from the latest designer clothing to the latest DVDs can be found in markets all over the city, often marketed to expatriates and international visitors.

Major industrial areas include Shijingshan, located on the western outskirts of the city.     Agriculture is carried out outside the urban area of Beijing, with wheat and maize (corn) being the main crops.  Vegetables are also grown in the regions closer to the urban area in order to supply the city.

Beijing is increasingly becoming known for its innovative entrepreneurs and high-growth start-ups. This culture is backed by a large community of both Chinese and foreign venture capital firms, such as Sequoia Capital, whose head office in China resides in Chaoyang, Beijing. Though Shanghai is seen as the economic centre of China, this is typically based on the numerous large corporations based there, rather than as a centre for Chinese entrepreneurship.

The development of Beijing continues to proceed at a rapid pace, and the vast expansion of Beijing has created a multitude of problems for the city. Beijing is known for its smog as well as the frequent "power-saving" programmes instituted by the government. Citizens of Beijing as well as tourists frequently complain about the quality of the water supply and the cost of the basic services such as electricity and natural gas. To reduce air pollution, a number of major industries have been ordered to reduce emissions or leave the city.  Beijing Capital Steel, once one of the city's largest employers and its single biggest polluter, has been moving most of its operations to Tangshan.  &

Specially designated industrial parks in Beijing include: Zhongguancun Science Park, Yongle Economic Development Zone,  Beijing Economic-technological Development Area, and Tianzhu Airport Industrial Zone.



Wangfujing Cathedral
The population of Beijing Municipality, defined as the total number of people who reside in Beijing for 6 months or more per year, was 17.4 million at the end of 2007. There were 12.04 million people in Beijing Municipality who had Beijing hukou (permanent residence), and the remainder were on temporary residence permits.        /ref>   /ref> In 2006, a study by the Beijing Statistics Bureau estimated the total of all people living in Beijing (permanent, temporary, unregistered and others) to be "close to 20 million."    
Recent statistics cited by China Daily put the number of migrant workers in the service and construction industries in Beijing at "more than 5.1 million."  /ref>  In addition, there is a large number of migrant workers ( min gong) who live illegally in Beijing without any official residence permit (or unregistered people).

The population of Beijing's urban core (city proper) is around 7.7 million. After Chongqing and Shanghai, Beijing is the third largest of the four municipalities of the PRC, which are equivalent to provinces in China's administrative structure.

Most of Beijing's residents belong to the Han Chinese majority. Other ethnic minorities include the Manchu, Hui, and Mongol.    A Tibetan-language high school exists for youth of Tibetan ancestry, nearly all of whom have come to Beijing from Tibet expressly for their studies.    A sizable international community exists in Beijing, many attracted by the highly growing foreign business and trade sector, others by the traditional and modern culture of the city. Much of this international community lives in the areas around the Beijing CBD, Sanlitun, and Wudaokou. In recent years there has also been an influx of South Koreans who live in Beijing predominantly for business and study purpose. Many of them live in the Wangjing and Wudaokou areas.

Excludes members of the People's Liberation Army in active service. Department of Population, Social, Science and Technology Statistics of the National Bureau of Statistics of China ( ) and Department of Economic Development of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission of China ( ), eds. Tabulation on Nationalities of 2000 Population Census of China ( ). 2 vols. Beijing: Nationalities Publishing House ( ), 2003. (ISBN 7-105-05425-5)



The National Centre for the Performing Arts
The Old Beijing Observatory
A scene from a Beijing opera
A Chinese cloisonné dish from the Qing dynasty
People native to urban Beijing speak the Beijing dialect, which belongs to the Mandarin subdivision of spoken Chinese. Beijing dialect is the basis for Standard Mandarin, the language used in mainland China,  Taiwan, and Singapore. Rural areas of Beijing Municipality have their own dialects akin to those of Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing Municipality.

Beijing opera, or Peking opera (Jingju 京剧), is well-known throughout the national capital. Commonly lauded as one of the highest achievements of Chinese culture, Beijing opera is performed through a combination of song, spoken dialogue, and codified action sequences, such as gestures, movement, fighting and acrobatics. Much of Beijing opera is carried out in an archaic stage dialect quite different from modern Standard Mandarin and from the Beijing dialect.

Siheyuans line hutongs ( ), or alleys, which connect the interior of Beijing's old city. They are usually straight and run east to west so that doorways can face north and south for Feng Shui reasons. They vary in width — some are very narrow, enough for only a few pedestrians to pass through at a time.

Once ubiquitous in Beijing, siheyuans and hutongs are now rapidly disappearing, as entire city blocks of hutongs are leveled and replaced with high-rise buildings.    Residents of the hutongs are entitled to live in the new buildings, in apartments of at least the same size as their former residences. Many complain, however, that the traditional sense of community and street life of the hutongs cannot be replaced.    Residents, however, have limited control over their own property, as the government usually owns it.    Some particularly historic or picturesque neighbourhoods of hutongs are being preserved and restored by the government, especially for the 2008 Olympics.

Mandarin cuisine is the local style of cooking in Beijing. The Peking Roast Duck is perhaps the most well-known dish. The Manhan Quanxi ("Manchu-Han Chinese full banquet") is a rare traditional banquet originally intended for the ethnic-Manchu emperors of the Qing Dynasty; it remains very prestigious and expensive. The Fuling Jiabing is a traditional Beijing snack food, a pancake (bing) resembling a flat disk with filling, made from fu ling (Poria cocos (Schw.) Wolf, or "tuckahoe"), an ingredient common in traditional Chinese medicine. Teahouses are also common in Beijing. Chinese tea comes in many varieties and some rather expensive types of Chinese tea are said to cure an ailing body extraordinarily well.

The cloisonné (or Jingtailan, literally "Blue of Jingtai") metalworking technique and tradition is a specialty of Beijing's cultural art, and is one of the most revered traditional crafts in China.    Cloisonné making requires elaborate and complicated processes which includes: base-hammering, copper-strip inlay, soldering, enamel-filling, enamel-firing, surface polishing and gilding.     Beijing's lacquerware is also well known for its sophisticated and intrinsic patterns and images carved into its surface, and the various decoration techniques of lacquer includes "carved lacquer" and "engraved gold".

Younger residents of Beijing have become more attracted to the nightlife, which has flourished in recent decade, breaking prior cultural traditions that practically restricted it to the upper class.




Classical gardens in Beijing
At the heart of Beijing's historical centre lies the Forbidden City, the enormous palace compound that was the home of the emperors of the Ming and Qing dynasties;    the Forbidden City also hosts the Palace Museum, which contains imperial collections of Chinese art. Surrounding the Forbidden City are several former imperial gardens, parks and scenic areas, notably the Beihai, Houhai, Shichahai, Zhongnanhai, Jingshan and Zhongshan.  These places, like the Beihai Park are described to be masterpieces of Chinese gardening art,  Beihai Park. UNECO World Heritage Tentative Lists  and are popular tourist destinations with tremendous historical importance; Zhongnanhai during the modern era has also been the political heart of various Chinese governments and regimes and is now the headquarters of the Communist Party of China. From the Tiananmen Square, which is located right across the Forbidden City, there are several notable sites, such as the Tiananmen, Qianmen, the Great Hall of the People, National Museum of China, Monument to the People's Heroes, and Mausoleum of Mao Zedong. The Summer Palace and the Old Summer Palace both lie at the western part of the urban city of Beijing; the Summer Palace, a UNESCO World Heritage Site,    displays a comprehensive collection of imperial gardens and palaces that functioned as the summer retreat for the Qing Dynasty emperors.

Perhaps among the most well-known religious sites in the city is the Temple of Heaven (Tiantan), located in southeastern Beijing, also a UNESCO World Heritage Site,    where emperors of the Ming and Qing dynasties made visits for annual ceremonies of prayer to Heaven for good harvest; located in the opposite direction of the Temple of Heaven at the northern part of the city are the Temple of Earth (Ditian), and the Temple of the Sun (Ritan) and Temple of the Moon (Yuetan), both respectively located in the eastern and western parts of the urban area. Other well-known temple sites located in Beijing include the Dongyue Temple, Tanzhe Temple, Miaoying Temple, White Cloud Temple, Yonghe Temple, Fayuan Temple, Wanshou Temple and the Big Bell Temple. The city also has its own Confucius Temple, and a Guozijian. The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception was built in 1605, and is the oldest Catholic church in Beijing. The Niujie Mosque is also the oldest mosque in Beijing, with a history over a thousand years old.
A German postcard of Beijing from 1900
Beijing contains several well-preserved pagodas and stone pagodas, such as the towering Pagoda of Tianning Temple, which was built during the Liao Dynasty from 1100–1120, and the Pagoda of Cishou Temple, which was built in 1576 during the Ming Dynasty. Several historically important stone bridges are also located in Beijing, including the 12th century-built Lugou Bridge, the 17th century-built Baliqiao bridge and the 18th century-built Jade Belt Bridge. The Beijing Ancient Observatory displays pretelescopic spheres dating back to the Ming and Qing dynasties. The Fragrant Hills (Xiangshan) is a popular scenic public park that consists of natural landscape areas as well as traditional and cultural relics. The Beijing Botanical Garden exhibits over 6,000 species of plants, including a variety of trees, bushes and flowers, and an extensive peony garden. The Taoranting Park, Chaoyang Park, Haidian Park and Zizhu Yuan are all popular recreational parks that consist of a variety of natural landscapes. The Beijing Zoo is a center of zoological research that also contains rare animals from various continents, including the giant panda of China.

Beijing is also known for its siheyuan (courtyard houses) and hutong (alleys), although they are increasingly disappearing due to the growth of city constructions and are giving way to high-rises. The city has several well-preserved neighborhoods of shiheyuan, including some of the more grand courtyard houses, such as the Prince Gong Mansion. There are over hundreds of museums in Beijing,       and aside from the Palace Museum in the Forbidden City and the National Museum of China, other major museums include the National Art Museum of China, the Capital Museum, the Beijing Art Museum, the Military Museum of the Chinese People's Revolution, the Geological Museum of China, the Beijing Museum of Natural History and the Paleozoological Museum of China.

Located at the outskirts of urban Beijing but within its municipality are the Thirteen Tombs of the Ming Dynasty, the lavish and elaborate burial sites of thirteen Ming emperors, which have been designated as part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site "Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties".    The archaeological Peking Man site at Zhoukoudian is another World Heritage Site within the Beijing municipality,    and it contains a wealth of discoveries, including one of the first specimens of Homo erectus, and an assemblage of bones of the gigantic hyena Pachycrocuta brevirostris. There are several sections of the UNESCO World Heritage Site Great Wall of China    that are on the outskirts of the municipality, most notably Badaling, Jinshanling, Simatai and Mutianyu.



The CCTV Headquarters under construction (April 2008)

Beijing Television (BTV) broadcasts on numbered channels 1 through 10. Three radio stations feature programmes in English: Hit FM on FM 88.7, Easy FM by China Radio International (CRI) on FM 91.5, and the newly launched Radio 774 on AM 774. Beijing Radio Stations is the family of radio stations serving the city audience; its stations include the music station on 97.4 FM as well as a series of other stations focused on news, sports, educational programming, and others.



The well-known Beijing Evening News (Beijing Wanbao) newspaper is distributed every afternoon, covering news about Beijing in Chinese. Other newspapers include The Beijing News (Xin Jing Bao), the Beijing Star Daily, the Beijing Morning News, and the Beijing Youth Daily (Beijing Qingnian Bao), as well as English-language weeklies Beijing Weekend and Beijing Today (the English-language edition of Youth Daily). People's Daily and China Daily (English) are published in Beijing as well.  Nationally circulated Chinese newspapers are also available in Beijing.

Publications primarily aimed at international visitors and the expatriate community include the English-language periodicals City Weekend, Beijing This Month, Beijing Talk, That's Beijing and MetroZine.

The international press, including English and Japanese-language newspapers and magazines, are available in major international hotels and friendship stores, and content often appears complete.



Beijing hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics and the 2008 Summer Paralympics. City officials relocated 350,000 people for the construction of the Beijing National Stadium,    which was completed on 28 June 2008.   
Professional sports teams based in Beijing include:

*Chinese Super League
** Beijing Guoan
*Chinese Football Association Jia League‎
** Beijing Hongdeng
** Beijing Institute of Technology FC
*Chinese Basketball Association
** Beijing Ducks
*Women's Chinese Basketball Association
** Beijing Shougang
*Asia League Ice Hockey
** China Sharks
*China Baseball League
** Beijing Tigers

The Beijing Olympians of the ABA, formerly a CBA team, kept their name and maintained a roster of primarily Chinese players after moving to Maywood, California in 2005.




With the growth of the city following economic reforms, Beijing has evolved as the most important transportation hub in the People's Republic of China, and within the larger East Asian region. Encircling the city are five ring roads, nine expressways and city express routes, eleven China National Highways, several railway routes, and an international airport.

The Beijing Railway Station


Beijing has long been the largest railway hub in China. There are railway lines from Beijing to Shanghai, Guangzhou, Kowloon, Harbin, Qinhuangdao, Baotou, Yuanping, Chengde, and Tianjin. As of 1 August 2006, Beijing Railway Station has 167 trains stopping daily, while Beijing West Railway Station has 176 trains. These two railway stations serve as major transportation nodes in the city. The state-of-the-art Beijing South Railway Station opened in August 2008, and serves as the Beijing terminus for the Beijing-Tianjin high-speed train, the fastest regular passenger train service in the world, as well as all other high-speed CRH trains. International trains, including lines to Kowloon in Hong Kong, and cities in Mongolia, Russia, and North Korea, all run through Beijing.

Several other railway stations in urban Beijing handle regular passenger traffic: Beijing North, Beijing East, Fengtai and other smaller stations. There are also a number of other stations serving suburban areas. Passenger trains in China are numbered according to their direction in relation to Beijing.




:See: Ring Roads of Beijing, Expressways of Beijing and China National Highways of Beijing for more related information.
An air-conditioned articulated bus operating on Beijing Bus Rapid Transit Line 1
Beijing is connected via road links from all parts of China as part of the National Trunk Road Network. Nine expressways of China (with six wholly new expressways under projection or construction) connect with Beijing, as do eleven China National Highways. Within Beijing itself, an elaborate network of five ring roads has developed, but they appear more rectangular than ring-shaped. Due partly to its design as an ancient capital, roads in Beijing often are in one of the four compass directions.

Beijing's urban transport is dependent upon the five "ring roads" ( ) that successively surround the city, with the Forbidden City area marked as the geographical centre for the ring roads. The 1st Ring road is not officially defined. The 2nd Ring Road is fully located in Beijing's inner city areas. Ring roads tend to resemble expressways progressively as they extend outwards, with the 5th Ring Road and 6th Ring Road being full-standard National expressways - linked to other roads only with interchanges. Expressways to other regions of China are generally accessible from the 3rd Ring Road outward.

One of the biggest concerns with traffic in Beijing involves its apparently ubiquitous traffic jams, although in recent years ITS has been implemented in many areas in attempts to alleviate the problem. Traffic in the city centre is often gridlocked, especially around rush hour. Even outside of rush hour, several roads still remain clogged up with traffic. Urban area ring roads and major thoroughfares, especially near Chang'an Avenue, are normally cited as high-congestion areas.

Exacerbating Beijing's traffic problems is its relatively underdeveloped mass transit system. Frequently cited is the city's subway system which has 8 lines for its 17 million citizens. In comparison, New York City has 26 lines for its 8 million citizens. Beijing's urban design layout further complicates the situation of the transportation system.    Compounding the problem is patchy enforcement of traffic regulations, and road rage. Beijing authorities claim that traffic jams may be a thing of a past come the 2008 Olympics. The authorities have introduced several bus lanes where, during rush hour, all vehicles except for public buses must keep clear.

Chang'an Avenue runs east-west through the centre of Beijing, past Tian'anmen. It is a major through route and is often called the "First Street in China" by authorities.



Beijing Capital International Airport's new Terminal 3
Beijing's primary airport is the Beijing Capital International Airport (IATA: PEK;  ) near Shunyi, which is about 20 km northeast of city centre. With renovations for the 2008 Olympics, the airport now boasts three terminals, with Terminal 3 being one of the largest in the world. Most domestic and nearly all international flights arrive at and depart from Capital Airport. Capital Airport is the main hub for Air China. The capital links Beijing with almost every other Chinese city with regular air passenger service. It is linked to central Beijing by the Airport Expressway and is a roughly 40-minute drive from the city centre during good traffic hours. Prior to the 2008 Olympics, another expressway, the 2nd Airport Expressway, was built to the Airport, as well as a light rail system, which is now connected to the Beijing Subway.

Other airports in the city include Beijing Liangxiang Airport, Beijing Nanyuan Airport, Beijing Xijiao Airport, Beijing Shahe Airport and Beijing Badaling Airport. Nanyuan serves as the hub for only one passenger airline, and these airports are primarily for military use and less well-known to the public.



Line 5 platform at Dongdan station, with platform screen doors
The Beijing Subway system opened in 1971, and only consisted of two lines until the opening of the northern arc Line 13 in 2002. Due to recent expansion, the evolving system now has nine lines, four of which are underground, and five are above ground. Line 1, along with its new eastern expansion known as the Batong Line crosses almost all of urban Beijing from east to west. Line 5 serves as the north-south axial line. Fare is 2 yuan flat throughout. There is an extensive system nearly 700 bus and trolleybus routes in Beijing as of 2008, including three bus rapid transit routes.    All public transportation can be accessed with the Yikatong card, which uses radio frequencies to be scanned at subway stations and on public transit buses.

Registered taxis can be found throughout Beijing, although a large number of unregistered taxis also exist. As of 30 June 2008, all fares on legal taxis start at 10 Renminbi for the first 3 km and 2.00 Renminbi per additional kilometer, not counting idling fees. Most taxis are Hyundai Elantras, Hyundai Sonatas, Peugeot Citroëns and Volkswagen Jettas. After 15 km, the base fare is increased by 50% (but only applied to the portion of the distance over 15 km, so that the passenger is not retroactively charged extra for the first 15 km). Between 11 pm and 5 am, the fee is increased by 20%, starting at 11 RMB and increasing at a rate of 2.4 RMB per km. Rides over 15 km and between 11 pm and 6 am apply both charges, for a total increase of 80% (120%*150%=180%).



Tsinghua University is a top university in mainland China
Beijing is home to a great number of colleges and universities, including several well-regarded universities of international stature, such as Peking University and Tsinghua University.  Owing to Beijing's status as the political and cultural capital of China, a larger proportion of tertiary-level institutions are concentrated here than in any other city in China, reaching at least 59 in number. Many international students from Japan, Korea, North America, Europe, Southeast Asia, and elsewhere come to Beijing to study every year. The institutions listed here are administered by China's Ministry of Education.



There are many famous primary schools in the urban area of Beijing.
*Beijing Jingshan School ( )
*Beijing First Experiment Primary School ( )
*Beijing Second Experiment Primary School ( )
*Beijing Fuxue Primary School ( )
*Zhong Guan Cun No.1 Primary School ( )
*Zhong Guan Cun No.2 Primary School ( )
*Beijing Primary School ( )
*The Elementary School Affiliated to Renmin University of China ( )
*The Experimental Primary School Attached to Beijing Normal University ( )



Famous middle schools in Beijing are:
*Beijing No.4 Middle School ( )
*The High School Affiliated to Renmin University of China ( )
*Beijing 101 Middle School ( )
*Beijing No.2 Middle School ( )
*The Experimental High School Attached to Beijing Normal University ( )
*The High School Attached to Beijing Normal University ( )
*The Second High School Attached to Beijing Normal University ( )
*The Affiliated High School of Peking University ( )
*High School attached to Tsinghua University ( )
*Beijing No.8 Middle School ( )
*Beijing No.5 Middle School ( )
*Beijing No.80 Middle School ( )
*Beijing Huiwen Middle School ( )
*Beijing Chenjinlun High School ( )
*Beijing Xicheng Foreign Language School ( )



Beijing maintains 42 "sister city" partnerships with the following cities.    Paris and Rome are "partner cities" due to an exclusive agreement between those two cities.



*Cosmological city
*Large Cities Climate Leadership Group
*List of hospitals in Beijing
*List of mayors of Beijing
*Tourist attractions of Beijing
*2045 Peking - the name of an asteroid
*List of economic and technological development zones in Beijing



*  
*  
*  
*




* Beijing Government website (Chinese & English)
* 
* Economic profile for Beijing at HKTDC




Copenhagen



Copenhagen ( ;    ) is the capital and largest city of Denmark, with a population of 1,161,063.    Copenhagen is situated on the Islands of Zealand and Amager.

First documented in the 11th century, Copenhagen became the capital of Denmark in the beginning of the 15th century and during the 17th century under the reign of 
Christian IV it became an important regional centre. Copenhagen is usually ranked as one of the two largest cities of the Nordic Countries. [ LARGEST CITY Copenhagen or Stockholm ?  [ Denmark in brief .  With the completion of the transnational Oresund Bridge in 2000, Copenhagen has become the centre of the increasingly integrating Øresund Region with around 3.7 million inhabitants covering an area of 20,869 km² (177/km²).  Within this region, Copenhagen and Malmö is in the process of growing into one common metropolitan area.

Copenhagen is a major regional center of culture, business, media, and science. In 2008 Copenhagen was ranked #4 by Financial Times-owned FDi magazine on their list of Top50 European Cities of the Future after London, Paris and Berlin.    In the 2008 Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index, published by MasterCard, Copenhagen was ranked 14th in the world and 1st in Scandinavia.    Life science, information technology and shipping are important sectors and research & development plays a major role in the city's economy. Its strategic location and excellent infrastructure with the largest airport in Scandinavia    located 14 minutes by train from the city centre, has made it a regional hub and a popular location for regional headquarters    as well as conventions.

Copenhagen has repeatedly been recognized as one of the cities with the best quality of life.          and in 2008 it was singled out as the Most Liveable City in the World by international lifestyle magazine Monocle on their Top 25 Most Liveable Cities 2008 list.    It is also considered one of the world's most environmentally friendly cities with the water in the inner harbor being so clean that it can be used for swimming and 36 % of all citizens commuting to work by bicycle, every day bicycling a total 1.1 million km. Since the turn of the millennium Copenhagen has seen a strong urban and cultural development and has been described as a boom town.    This is partly due to massive investments in cultural facilities as well as infrastructure and a new wave of succesful designers, chefs and architects.



Copenhagen c. 1895
The Palace during renovation.

From its humble origins as a fishing village to its heyday as the glittering capital of the Danish Empire, to its current position as one of the world's premier design capitals, the stories and characters of Copenhagen's history can be discovered in its sumptuous palaces, copper-roofed town houses and atmospheric cobbled squares. 
From the Viking Age there was a fishing village by the name of "Havn" (harbour) at the site. Recent archeological finds indicate that by the 11th century, Copenhagen had already grown into a small town with a large estate, a church, a market, at least two wells and many smaller habitations spread over a fairly wide area.  Arkæologer graver ny teori om København op af mulden (Archeologists develop new theory about Copenhagen from their digs), Videnskab.dk, 5 November 2008  From the middle of the 12th century it grew in importance after coming into the possession of the Bishop Absalon, who fortified it in 1167, the year traditionally marking the foundation of Copenhagen. The excellent harbour encouraged Copenhagen's growth until it became an important centre of commerce.
The city's origin as a harbour and a place of commerce is reflected in its name. Its original designation, from which the contemporary Danish name is derived, was Køpmannæhafn, "merchants' harbor". The English name for the city is derived from its Low German name, Kopenhagen. The element hafnium is also named for Copenhagen, whose Latin name is Hafnia.  Biography of George de Hevesy

It was repeatedly attacked by the Hanseatic League as the Germans took notice. In 1254, it received its charter as a city under Bishop Jakob Erlandsen.

During 1658-59 it withstood a severe siege by the Swedes under Charles X and successfully repelled a major assault. In 1801 a British fleet under Admiral Parker fought a major battle, the Battle of Copenhagen, with the Danish Navy in Copenhagen harbour. It was during this battle Lord Nelson famously "put the telescope to the blind eye" in order not to see Admiral Parker's signal to cease fire. When a British expeditionary force bombarded Copenhagen in 1807, to gain control of the Danish Navy, the city suffered great damage and hundreds of people were killed. The reason why the devastation was so great was that Copenhagen relied on an old defence-line rendered virtually useless by the 
increase in shooting range available to the British. But not until the 1850s were the ramparts of the city opened to allow new housing to be built around the lakes ("Søerne") which bordered the old defence system to the west. This dramatic increase of space was long overdue, not only because the old ramparts were out of date as a defence system, but also because of bad sanitation in the old city. Before the opening, Copenhagen Center was inhabited by approximately 125,000 people, peaking in the census of 1870 (140,000); today the figure is around 25,000. In 1901, Copenhagen expanded further, incorporating communities with 40,000 people, and in the process making Frederiksberg an enclave within Copenhagen.

During World War II, Copenhagen was occupied by German troops along with the rest of the country from 9 April 1940 until 4 May 1945. In August 1943, when the government's collaboration with the occupation forces collapsed, several ships were sunk in Copenhagen Harbour by the Royal Danish Navy to prevent them being used by the Germans. The city has grown greatly since the war, in the seventies using the so-called five-finger-plan of commuter train lines to surrounding towns and suburbs.

Since the summer 2000, the cities of Copenhagen and Malmö have been connected by a toll bridge/tunnel (Øresund Bridge), which allows both rail and road passengers to cross. As a result, Copenhagen has become the centre of a larger metropolitan area which spans both nations. The construction of the bridge has led to a large number of changes to the public transportation system and the extensive redevelopment of Amager, south of the main city.



Location of Coppenhagen in Denmark
Nørrebro seen from "Søerne"
Copenhagen City Hall
Copenhagen is located on the eastern shore of the island of Zealand (Sjælland) and partly on the island of Amager. Copenhagen faces the Øresund to the east, the strait of water that separates Denmark from Sweden, and that connects the North Sea with the Baltic Sea. On the Swedish side of the sound directly across from Copenhagen, lie the towns of Malmö and Landskrona.

Copenhagen is also a part of the Øresund region, which consists of Zealand, Lolland-Falster and Bornholm in Denmark and Scania in Sweden.



Copenhagen Municipality is an administrative unit that covers the central part of the actual city of Copenhagen. It is a fairly small part of the actual city that falles within the municipality both because it covers a very confined area and because the enclave of Frederiksberg is an independent municipality. Copenhagen consists of a number of boroughs and areas, including
* Indre By
* Østerbro
* Nørrebro
* Vesterbro
* Amagerbro
* Nordhavnen (North Habour)
* Valby
* Kongens Enghave (King's Meadow Garden), also known as Sydhavnen (meaning South Harbour)
* Christianshavn
* Christiania (Freetown)
* Sundbyvester (Sundby West),
* Sundbyøster (Sundby East)
* Ørestad
* Islands Brygge
* Bellahøj
* Brønshøj
* Ryparken
* Bispebjerg
* Vigerslev
* Vestamager
* Vanløse

The suffix -bro in the names Østerbro, Nørrebro, Vesterbro and Amagerbro should not be confused with the Danish word for bridge, which is also 'bro'. The term is thought to be an abbreviation or short form of the Danish word brolagt meaning paved referring to the roads paved with cobblestones leading to the city's former gates -



The conurbation of Copenhagen consists of several municipalities. After Copenhagen Municipality, the second largest is Frederiksberg Municipality which is an enclave inside Copenhagen Municipality. Both are contained in the larger Capital Region of Denmark, which contains most of the Copenhagen metropolitan area.

Previously, the areas of Frederiksberg, Gentofte and Copenhagen municipalities have been used to define the city of Copenhagen. This definition is now obsolete. To meet statistical needs after the latest municipal reform, which took place in the beginning of 2007, an effort has been made to work out definitions of lands (landsdele) in Denmark. A land is basically a geographical and statistical definition, and the area is not considered to be an administrative unit. The land of Copenhagen City includes the municipalities of Copenhagen, Dragør, Frederiksberg and Tårnby, with a total population of 656,582 in the beginning of 2008.   Statistics Denmark, table BEF1A07: Population 1 January by region, age, sex, marital status Retrieved on 2008-03-26.     Statistics Denmark, definitions of lands as of 2007-01-01 (excel-file, in danish) Retrieved on 2008-03-26.

Copenhagen and Frederiksberg were two of the three last Danish municipalities not belonging to a county. On 1 January 2007, the municipalities lost their county privileges and became part of Copenhagen Capital Region.



Suburban Copenhagen is planned according to the  Finger Plan, fingerplanen, initiated in 1947, dividing the suburbs into five fingers.  The Finger Plan, Denmark.dk  The S-train lines  are built according to the Finger Plan, while green wedges and highways are built in-between the fingers

The Little Finger

The northern suburbs form the little finger of the plan, and is traditionally the wealthiest of the suburbs. In popular language, the area is known as "The Whiskey Belt", although the area is mixed between mansions, larger houses, garden cities and mid-size houses. The area has a population of around 270,000 inhabitants.

* Gentofte Municipality: Klampenborg, Skovshoved, Charlottenlund, Hellerup, Gentofte, Ordrup, Jægersborg, Dyssegård, Vangede
* Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality: Kongens Lyngby, Ulrikkenborg, Brede, Virum, Sorgenfri, Lundtofte, Hjortekær
* Rudersdal Municipality: Søllerød, Holte, Øverød, Gl. Holte, Trørød, Nærum, Vedbæk, Skodsborg, Birkerød, Kajerød, Bistrup
* Hørsholm Municipality: Hørsholm, Usserød, Rungsted, Vallerød, Smidstrup
* Allerød Municipality: Allerød, Lillerød, Blovstrød
* Fredensborg Municipality: Fredensborg, Asminderød, Humlebæk, Kokkedal, Niverød, Nivå.

The Ring Finger
The North-Northwestern part of the suburbs forms the ring finger. The area is to a large extent formed by detached middle-class dwellings, with some exceptions of housing projects or upper-class areas. The area has a population of around 100,000 inhabitants.

* Gladsaxe Municipality: Gladsaxe, Bagsværd, Buddinge, Høje-Gladsaxe (Gladsaxe Heights), Mørkhøj, Søborg
* Furesø Municipality: Værløse, Farum, Hareskovby

The Middle Finger
The northwestern suburbs form the middle finger, and consists of a mixed area of both detached middle-class dwellings, widespread garden cities and large, low-rise public housing projects. The area has a considerable part of the industrial areas of metropolitan Copenhagen, mostly in the traditional sectors of manufacturing. The area has a population of around 110,000 inhabitants.

* Herlev Municipality: Herlev, Hjortespring
* Ballerup Municipality: Skovlunde, Ballerup, Måløv, Ågerup, Jonstrup, Egebjerg
* Egedal Municipality: Smørumnedre, Stenløse, Ølstykke

The Index Finger
The index finger forms the western suburbs, which are the suburbs with the lowest income per capita and the highest crime-rate. The suburbs vary from the petit bourgeois area of Glostrup to the widespread low housing projects of Albertslund and Taastrup. Of the total of 145,000 inhabitants, some 20% are immigrants of first or second generation.

* Rødovre Municipality: Rødovre, Islev
* Glostrup Municipality: Glostrup, Hvissinge, Ejby
* Brøndby Municipality: Brøndbyøster, Brøndbyvester, Brøndby Nord 
* Albertslund Municipality
* Høje-Taastrup Municipality: Taastrup, Høje-Taastrup, Tåstrupgård, Hedehusene

The Thumb
The southwest suburbs along the coast form the thumb of the plan. While the central parts of these suburbs are dominated by high-rise housing projects and low-income inhabitants, the distant part is dominated by detached middle-class houses. These suburbs have a population of some 215,000 inhabitants and has a sizeable number of immigrants.

* Hvidovre Municipality: Avedøre, Friheden, Hvidovre
* Brøndby Municipality: Brøndby Strand
* Vallensbæk Municipality
* Ishøj Municipality
* Greve Municipality: Hundige, Karlslunde, Greve
* Solrød Municipality: Solrød, Jersie
* Køge municipality: Køge, Ølby

The extra finger: Amager Island suburbs & Malmö
When the finger plan was initially introduced, the island of Amager wasn't included as the infrastructure was inadequate for modern suburban life. Later it has been improved, and the suburbs at the island hold some 53,000 inhabitants. Amager is now one of the most modern suburbs of Copehagen with increasing wealth. With the opening of the bridge to Sweden this finger has been extended all the way to Malmö. Under an official visit of the Swedish King in 2007 at the Copenhagen City Hall, Copenhagen Lord Mayor Ritt Bjerregaard caused a minor diplomatic incident by referring to Malmö as "København M" with an allusion to the Danish system of postal codes (Nørrebro being København N and Vesterbro being København V for instance), indicating that Malmö had turned into just another Copenhagen bourough. Today 25,000 Danes live in Malmö.  Malmø er blevet til København M, DR Online

* Tårnby Municipality: Tårnby, Kastrup
* Dragør Municipality



Summers in Copenhagen are mild with average high temperatures of around 21°C (70°F) and lows of 13°C (55°F), but temperatures could sometimes exceed 25°C (77°F+) and occasional heatwaves are common during the summer. Winters are cold, with temperatures of -2 to 4°C (28 - 40°F), and it rarely drop below −10 °C (14 °F).

Precipitation is moderate throughout the year, and snowfall occurs mainly in December through March, but snow cover does not remain a long time.

Nørrebro seen from "Søerne"
Copenhagen as seen from the City Hall at night

Kongens Nytorv
View from Rundetårn

Gefion Fountian



The city's appearance today is shaped by the key role it has played  as a regional center for centuries. Copenhagen has a multitude of districts, each representing its time and with its own distinctive character, making up a dense urban fabric. Other distinctive features of the Copenhagen of today is the abundance of water, the greenness and the elaborate system of bicycle paths that line almost every major street.




The oldest section of Copenhagen's inner city is often referred to as "Middelalderbyen" (The Medieval City). However, the most distinctive district of Copenhagen is Frederiksstaden developed during the reign of Frederick V. It has Amalienborg Palace at its centre and is dominated by the dome of the Marble Church as well as a number of elegant 18th century mansions. Also part of the old inner city of Copenhagen is the small island of Slotsholmen with Christiansborg Palace and Christianshavn. Around the historical city center lies a band of charming, dense and well-preserved residential bouroughs (Vesterbro, Inner Nørrebro, Inner Østerbro) dating mainly from late 19th century. They were built outside the old ramparts of the city when the city was finally allowed to expand beyond this barrier.

Sometimes referred to as "the City of Spires", Copenhagen is known for its horizontal skyline, only broken by spires at churches and castles. Most characteristic is the baroque spire of Church of Our Saviour with its spiralling and narrowing external stairs that visitors can climb to the very top of the spire. Other important spires are those of  Christiansborg Palace, the City Hall and the former Church of St. Nikolaj that now houses a modern art venue. A bit lower are the renaissance spires of Rosenborg Castle and the "dragon spire" of [[Christian IV of Christian IV's former stock exchange, so named because it is shaped as the tails of four dragons twined together.

Recent years has seen a tremendous boom in modern architecture in Copenhagen both when it comes to Danish architecture and works by international architects. For a few hundred years, virtually no foreign architects had worked in Copenhagen but since the mid 1990s the city and its immediate sourroundings have seen buildings and projects from such international star architects as Norman Foster   , Hadid   , Nouvel    and Liebeskind   . In the same time, a number of Danish architects have achieved great success both in Copenhagen and abroad. This has led to a number of international architecture awards. Buildings in Copenhagen have won RIBA European Awards four years in a row ("Sampension" in 2005   , "Kilen" in 2006   , "Tietgenkollegiet" in 2007    and the Royal Playhouse in 2008   ). At the 2008 World Architecture Festival in Barcelona, Bjarke Ingels Group won an award for the World's Best Residential Building 2008 for a house in Ørestad.    The Forum AID Award for Best building in Scandinavia went to Copenhagen buildings both in 2006    and 2008   . In 2008 British design magazine Monocle named Copenhagen the World's best design city 2008.

The boom in urban development and modern architecture means that the above mentioned horizontal skyline has seen some changes. A political majority has decided to keep the historical center free of highrises. But several areas will see or have already seen massive urban development.

Ørestad is the area that until now has seen most of the development. Located near  Copenhagen Airport, it currently boasts the largest mall in Scandinavia and a variety of office and residential buildings as well as an IT University and a high school. The two largest hotels in Scandinavia are currently under construction (ultimo 2008).

An ambitious regeneration project will create a new Carlsberg District at the historical premises of the Carlsberg Breweries that has terminated the production of beer in Copenhagen and moved it to Jutland. The district will have a total of nine highrises and seeks to mix the old industrial buildings with modern architecture to create a dense, maze-like quarter with a focus on sustainability and an active  urban life. A third major area of urban development also with a focus on sustanibility is Nordhavn. The Copenhagen tradition with urban development on artificial islands that was initiated with with Christianh IV's construction of Christianshavn has recently been continued with the creation of Havneholmen as well as a "canal city" in the South Harbour.

A district in Copenhagen with a very different take on modern architecture is that of Christiania whose many creative and idiosyncratic buildings are exponents of an "architecture without architects".




Østre Anlæg
University of Copenhagen Botanical Garden
Copenhagen is a green city with many big and small parks. King's Garden, the garden of Rosenborg Castle, is the oldest and most visited park in Copenhagen.    Its landscaping was commenced by Christian IV in 1606. Every year it sees more than 2,5 million visitors    and in the summer months it is packed with sunbathers, picknickers and ballplayers. It also serves as a sculpture garden with a permanent display of sculptures as well as temporary exhibits during summer.    Also located in the city centre are the Botanical Gardens particularly noted for their large complex of 19th century greenhouses donated by  Carlsberg founder J. C. Jacobsen.    Fælledparken is with its 58 hectars the largest park in Copenhagen.    It is popular for sports and hosts a long array of annual events like a free opera concert at the opening of the opera season, other open-air concerts, carnival, Labour Day celebrations and Copenhagen Historic Grand Prix which is a race for antique cars. A historical green space in the northeastern part of the city is Kastellet which is a well-presserved renaissance citadel that now serves mainly as a park. Another popular park is the Frederiksberg Garden which is a 32 hectars romantic landscape park. It houses a large colony of very tame grey herons along with other waterfowls. The park also offers views of the elephants and the elephant house designed by world-famous British architect Norman Foster of the adjacent Copenhagen Zoo.

Characteristic of Copenhagen is that a number of cemeteries double as parks, though only for the more quiet activities such as sunbathing, reading and meditation.    Assistens Cemetery, the burrial place of Hans Christian Andersen among others, is an important green space for the district of Inner Nørrebro and a Copenhagen institution. The lesser known Vestre Kirkegaard is with its 54 hectars the largest cemetery in Denmark    and offers a maze of dense groves, open lawns, winding paths, hedges, overgrown tombs, monuments, tree-lined avenues, lakes and other garden features.

It is official municipal policy in Copenhagen that all citizens by 2015 must be able to reach a park or beach on foot in less than 15 minutes.    In line with this policy, several new parks are under development in areas poor in green spaces.



Copenhagen and the surrounding areas have 3 beaches with a total of approx. 8 km of sandy beaches within 30 minutes of bicycling from the city centre. This includes Amager Strandpark, which opened in 2005 and includes a 2 km long artificial island and a total of 4,6 km of beaches   , located just 15 minutes by bicycle or a few minutes by metro from the city centre.

The beaches are supplemented by a system of harbour baths along the Copenhagen waterfront. The first and most popular of these is located at Islands Brygge  Harbour bath at Islands Brygge, e-architect  and has won international acclaim for its design.




Islands Brygge.

Depending on the boundaries used, the population of Copenhagen differs. Statistics Denmark uses a measure of the contiguously built-up urban area of Copenhagen, this means the number of communities included in this statistical abstract has changed several times, in the abstracts latest edition with close to 1.2 million (1,153,615 (2008)) inhabitants. This number is not a strict result of the commonly-used measuring methods of 200 meters of continuously build-up area, as there are exceptions to the general rule in the suburbs of Dragør, Taastrup, Birkerød, Hørsholm and Farum.  Statistics Denmark has never stated the geographical area of urban Copenhagen. However, we know it consists of Copenhagen Municipality, Frederiksberg and 16 of the 20 municipalities in the old counties Copenhagen and Roskilde, though 5 of them only partially. Largest cities of Denmark 2007

Statistics Denmark has worked out definitions of so-called lands (landsdele), a definition used to meet statistical needs on a lower level than regions. From this, the land of Copenhagen city (København by) is defined by the municipalities of Copenhagen, Dragør, Frederiksberg and Tårnby, with a total population of 656,582 in the beginning of 2008.   The surroundings of Copenhagen is defined by another land, Copenhagen suburban (Københavns omegn), which includes the municipalities of Albertslund, Ballerup, Brøndby, Gentofte, Gladsaxe, Glostrup, Herlev, Hvidovre, Høje-Taastrup, Ishøj, Lyngby-Taarbæk, Rødovre and Vallensbæk, and with a total population of 504,481 (January 1, 2008).   This gives a total population of 1,161,063 for these two lands together. The lands of Copenhagen city and Copenhagen suburban can together be used as a definition of the metropolitan area, although perhaps a somewhat narrow one.

From 1 January 2008 the population of the 34 municipalities closest to and including the municipality of Copenhagen is 1,857,263 and by 1 October 2008 the population of this area had grown to 1,872,706. Statistikbanken.dk Population table BEF1A07  Land area: 2,923 km² (1,032 sq mi). (Capital Region - Bornholm + East Zealand + Stevns) Water area: 105 km² (40.5 sq mi). Orienteering fra Københavns Kommune. Statistisk Kontor.2003 nr. 25   Thus, the region comprises 6.8% of the land area of Denmark, but has 34% of Denmark's population. This gives a total of 641 inhabitants per km² or 1,660 per square mile for the region. This compares with a population density in the rest of the country of approximately 90 per km² or around 230 per square mile.

Based on a 10%-isoline (data from 2002) in which at least 10% commutes into central parts of the Copenhagen area, most of Zealand would be covered and this area has a population of about 2.3 million inhabitants.  /ref>

Since the opening of the Øresund Bridge in 2000, commuting between and integration of Greater Malmö and Copenhagen have increased rapidly, and a combined statistical metropolitan area has formed. This metropolitan area, which has a population of 2,501,094 (2008) is expected to be officially defined by the respective statistics divisions of Denmark and Sweden in the upcoming years.

A high-ranking civil servant of the Interior Ministry, Henning Strøm, who was involved in (i.e. known as "the Father of") a past municipal reform, which took effect on 1 April 1970, said on television, broadcast in connection with the recent Kommunalreformen ("The Municipal Reform" of 2007), that Copenhagen municipality would encompass an area with 1.5 million inhabitants, if the principles of the 1970 municipal reform were also applied on Copenhagen municipality. DR netnews 25-06-04  In other words: in the rest of Denmark the city occupies only part of the municipality, but in Copenhagen the municipality of Copenhagen occupies only part of the city of Copenhagen.



Since the late 1990s, Copenhagen has undergone a transformation from a cozy Scandinavian capital to a cool metropolitan city of international scope in the league of cities like Barcelona and Amsterdam.       This is due to massive investments in infrastructure as well as culture and wave of new successful Danish architects, designers and chefs. Between 1998 and 2008, lifestyle journalists wordwide (from Wallpaper to the NewYorkTimes) have praised Copenhagen as a cool, well-functioning creative city (see "Copenhagen In international rankings" below).




Copenhagen has a wide array of museums of International standard. The National Museum, Nationalmuseet, is Denmark's largest museum of Archaeology and cultural history, comprising the histories of Danish and foreign cultures alike. The National Gallery - "Statens Museum for Kunst" - is Denmark's national art museum and contains collections dating from 12th century and all the way up to present day artists. Among artists represented in the collections are Rubens, Rembrandt, Picasso, Braque, Léger, Matisse and Emil Nolde. Another important Copenhagen art museum is the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek founded by second generation Carlsberg tycoon-philantropist  Carl Jacobsen and is built around his personal collections. Its main focus is  classical Egyptian, Roman and Greek sculptures and other antiquities and a collection of Rodin sculptures that is the largest outside France    (Glypto-, from the Greek root glyphein, to carve and theke, a storing-place). Besides its sculpture collections, the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek also holds a comprehensive collection of paintings of impressionist and post-impressionist painters such as Monet,Renoir, Cézanne, van Gogh and Toulouse-Lautrec as well as Danish Golden Age painters. Loiusiana is an internationally acclaimed museum of modern art situated on the coast just north of Copenhagen. It is located in the middle of a sculpture garden on a cliff overlooking Øresund. The  The museum is included in the Patricia Schultz book 1,000 Places to See Before You Die. The Danish Museum of Art & Design is housed in the 18th century former Frederiks Hospital and displays Danish design as well as international design and crafts.

Other museums include:
* Thorvaldsens Museum is a single-artist museum dedicated to the oeuvre,of romantic Danish sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen who lived and worked in Rome.
*  Cisternerne is a small but different museum dedicated to modern glass art. It is located in some grotto-like former cisterns that come complete with Stalactites formed by the changing water levels.
* The Ordrupgaard Museum is an art museum located just notth of Copenhagen in an old mansion with an extension by Iraqi-British architect Zaha Hadid. It features 19th century French and Danish art and is particularly noted for its works by Paul Gaugin.




Copenhagen Opera House
 The Royal Danish Theatre

In January 2009 the new Copenhagen Concert Hall will open. It is designed by Jean Nouvel and will have four halls with the main auditorium seating 1800 people. It will serve as the home of the Danish National Symphony Orchestra and along with the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles the most expensive concert hall ever built.    Another important venue for classical music is the Tivoli Concert Hall located in the histtrocal Tivoli Gardens. The Copenhagen Opera House (in Danish usually called Operaen) that opened in 2005 and is designed by Henning Larsen, is the national opera house of Denmark and among the most modern opera houses in the world. The old Royal Danish Theatre dating from 1748 still works as a supplementary opera scene. The Royal Danish Theatre is also home to the Royal Danish Ballet. Gounded in 1748 along with the theatre, it is one of the oldest ballet troups in Europe. It is home the the Bournonville style of ballet.

Copenhagen has a significant jazz scene that has  existed for many years. It developed when a number of American jazz musicians such as Ben Webster, Thad Jones, Richard Boone, Ernie Wilkins, Kenny Drew, Ed Thigpen, Bob Rockwell and others such as rock guitarist Link Wray came to live in Copenhagen during the 1960s. Every year in early July Copenhagen's streets, aquares and parks fills up with big and small jazz concerts during the Copenhagen Jazz Festival (see yearly events).
The most important venue for rhythmical music in Copenhagen is Vega in Vesterbro district which has been chosen as "best concert venue in Europe" by international music magazine Live

For free entertainment one can stroll along Strøget, especially between Nytorv and Højbro Plads, which in the late afternoon and evening is a bit like an impromptu three-ring circus with musicians, magicians, jugglers and other street performers.

View from Amerikakaj




Copenhagen has a wide variety of sport teams. The two major football teams are Brøndby IF and FC København. Brøndby IF plays at Brøndby Stadium in Brøndby and FC København plays at Parken in Østerbro, Copenhagen.
Notable Copenhagen teams playing at the second highest level in Danish football (the Danish 1st Division) include Lyngby BK, AB, HIK, Frem, Brønshøj, Fremad Amager and Skjold.

Copenhagen also has three ice hockey teams: Rødovre Mighty Bulls, Herlev Hornets and Nordsjælland Cobras.

There are a lot of handball teams in Copenhagen. FC København owns both a women's and a men's team, which have the same name and logo. They were formerly known as FIF. Of other clubs playing in the "highest" leagues there are; Ajax Heroes, Ydun, and HIK (Hellerup).

Rugby union is also played in the Danish capital with teams such as CSR-Nanok, Copenhagen Scrum, Exiles, Froggies and Rugbyklubben Speed.

The Danish Australian Football League, based in Copenhagen is the largest Australian rules football competition outside of the English speaking world.

Copenhagen is also home to a number of Denmark's 40-odd cricket clubs. Although Denmark has been an associate member of the International Cricket Council since 1966, the sport is not taught much in schools, and Danish cricket competes unfavourably with the much more widely followed sport of football for players, facilities, media attention and spectators.

The second World Outgames will take place in Copenhagen in 2009, after Berlin refused to stage them due to the continuing rivalry between the two gay sporting organisations. It would be the largest such event hosted in Copenhagen.




Copenhagen has the two oldest amusement parks in the World.

World-famous  Tivoli Gardens is an amusement park and pleasure garden located right in the middle of Copenhagen between the the City Hall Square and the the Central Station. Among its rides are the oldest still operating roller coaster and the oldest ferris wheel in the World.  Tivoli Gardens, the rides  It also function as an open-air concert venue. It opened on August 15 1843 making it the second oldest amusement park in the world. Dyrehavsbakken (in English "the Deer Garden Hill") is located in Klampenborg a little north of Copenhagen in a forested area of great natural beauty. Having been made into an amusement park complete with rides, games and restaurants by Christian IV, it is the oldest surviving amusement park in the World.




Copenhagen is a centre for the New Nordic Cuisine.  Nordic Cuisine, New York Times  In November 2004 a Nordic Kitchen Symposium was helt in Copenhagen at the initiative of Danish chef and gastronome Claus Meyer. The symposium had attandance of top chefs from all of the Nordic countries and led to the adoption of a Manifesto for the New Nordic Cuisine.   Manifesto for a New Nordic Cuisine  Claus Meyer is also the co-founder of the two-Michelin star  Restaurant Noma (Nordisk Madhus) which is a flagship restaurant for the new Nordic cuisine. In 2008 it was ranked as 10th best in the World by acclaimed British restaurant & fine dining magazine Restaurant at their 50 Best Restaurants of the World 2008-list. Furthermore, the users of the international website TripAdvisor with 25 million users a month rated Noma as the best restaurant in the world.  TripAdvisor ranking

As of 2008 Copenhagen boasts a total of 11 Michelin star restaurants. This is by far the highest number of any Nordic city. Apart from Noma they include one of only two Thai restaurants worldwide that has received a Michelin star. Due to the development,  Copenhagen is increasingly being recognized internationally as a gourmet destination.  The Top 10 cities to visit in 2009, TimesOnline

Apart from the selection of high end restaurants, Copenhagen offers a great variety of Danish, International and ethnic restaurants and it is possible to find modest eateries with open sandwiches (called "smørrebrød"), which is the traditional and best known dish for lunch. Most restaurants, though, serve international dishes. danish pastry, another local specialty, can be sampled from the numerous bakeries found in all parts of the city.

Copenhagen has long been associated with beer.Carlsberg beer has been brewed at the brewery's premises at the border between Vesterbro and Valby districts since 1847 and has long been almost synonumous with Danish beer production. However, recent years have seen an explosive growth in the number of microbreweries so that Denmark today has more than 100 breweries  Nyeste artikler fra Bryggeriforeningen, Bryggeriforeningen , many of which are located in Copenhagen. Some like Nørrebro Bryghus also act as brewpubs where it is possible also to eat at the premisses. Many cafés specialize in a huge selection of quality beers and beer has also become an important ingridient in the New Nordic Cuisine.



Copenhagen is the media centre of Denmark. DR, the major Danish public service broadcasting corporation collected their activities in a new headquarters, DR byen, in 2006 and 2007. Similarly has Odense based TV2 collected its Copenhagen activities in a modern media house in the South Harbour.
    The two national daily newspapters Politiken and Berlingske Tidende and the two tabloids  Ekstra Bladet and B. T. are based in Copenhagen. Other important media corporations include Aller Press which is the largest publisher of weekly and monthly magazines in Scandinavia, the Egmont media group and Gyldendal, the largest Danish publisher of books.

Copenhagen also has a sizable movie and television industry. Filmbyen, The Movie City, which is located in a former military camp in the suburg of Hvidovre and houses several movie companies and studio studios. Among the movie campanies are Zentropa co-owned by Danish movie director Lars von Trier who is behind several international movie productions as well as a founding force behind the Dogma Movement.




* Copenhagen Fashion Week takes place every year in February and August. It is the largest fashion event in Northern Europe.  Fashion Capital Copenhagen  On the catwalks are a growing number of new and known Danish talent with a preview of their upcoming collections. And at the three trade fairs, CPH Vision, Gallery and Copenhagen International Fashion Fair, you will find an additional 1,100 exhibitors representing a total of over 2,300 international brand name collections. Danish fashion is known for its unique angle on design, innovation and aesthetics. With a more modern approach to femininity and functionality, expressed in fresh silhouettes, a focus on details and incomparable quality. These are only some of the reasons why more than 50,000 buyers, designers and global press attend Copenhagen Fashion Week twice a year. Copenhagen Fashion Week is organised by the Danish Fashion Institute - a newly founded network organisation created by and for the Danish fashion industry.  Copenhagen Fashion Week

* Carnival in Copenhagen takes place every year since 1982 during the Whitsun Holiday in Fælledparken and around the city. 120 bands, 2000 dancers and 100,000 spectators participate.  History of Copenhagen

* Copenhagen Distortion is a youth culture festival capturing the zeitgeist of the city, gathering every year (5 days up to the first weekend of June) up to 30.000 people in the streets, in shops, galleries, clubs, bars, in boats and buses, with a cultural focus on street culture, art and upfront dance music.  Copenhagen Distortion

* Roskilde Festival is a music festival helt every year in Roskilde west of Copenhagen. Gathering around 100,000 people every year, it is one of the four largest rock music festivals in Europe..

* Copenhagen Jazz Festival, which begins on the first Friday in July, is a popular annual event that is the result of Copenhagen's significant jazz scene. The festival takes place throughout the city in streets, squares and parks as well as in cafés and concert halls.  Copenhagen Jazz Festival 3+ years, Wonderful Copenhagen  It embraces around 900 concerts, 100 venues and over 200,000 guests from Denmark and around the world. It is recognized as one of the leading jazz festivals in the World.  Top 10 best Jazz Festivals, TripAdvisor   Copenhagen Jazz Festival

* Copenhagen Pride is a gay pride festival taking place every year in August. Among the events is "Tivoli goes pink" and it ends with a parade.  Copenhagen Pride

* Copenhagen Cooking takes place in August every year and is a food festival with a wide array of events all over the city.

* Copenhagen International Film Festival takes place in September every year with a focus on European films. The main prize is called the Golden Swan.  Copenhagen International Film Festival



Middelgrunden wind farm just off Copenhagen
The Danish National Bank. Designed by Arne Jacobsen.
Copenhagen is the economical and financial centre of Denmark  Regionale regnskaber 2005 - Nyt fra Danmarks Statistik - Danmarks Statistik   and also a strong business and economic centre in the entire Scandinavian-Baltic region. In 2008 Copenhagen was ranked 4th by Financial Times-owned FDi magazine on their list of Top50 European Cities of the Future after London, Paris and Berlin.  Top 50 European City of the Future 2008/09  In 2006/07 FDi Magazine named Copenhagen Scandinavian City of the Future  Scandinavian City of the Future 06/07  and in 2004/05 Copenhagen was named Northern European City of the Future ahead of other cities from Scandinavia, UK, Ireland and Benelux.  Northern European City of the Future 2004/05  In the 2008 Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index, published by MasterCard, Copenhagen was ranked 14th in the world and 1st in Scandinavia.    Copenhagen is one of the cities in Western Europe attracting most regional headquarters and distribution centers.  Among the international companies that have chosen to locate their regional headquarters in Copenhagen is Microsoft.There are 2,100 foreign companies located in the Copenhagen area, of which approx. 500 are Scandinavian head offices, representing a wide range of industries.

Copenhagen has a service oriented economy. An important sector is life science and  research & development plays a major role in the economy of the city. The entire Oresund Region is in cooperation with Sweden being promoted as Medicon Valley. Major Danish biotech companies like Novo Nordisk and Lundbeck, both of which are among 50 largest pharmaceutical and biotech companies in the World, are located in the greater Copenhagen area.  USATODAY.com   The region also boasts the largest IT-cluster in Scandinavia with nearly 100,000 employees and the city of Copenhagen is home to Nokia's largest research centre outside Finland.   Copenhagen - Overview  Shipping is also an import business with Maersk, the World's largest shipping company, having their world headquarters in Copenhagen.

Several international companies have established their regional headquarters in Copenhagen, e.g. Microsoft. Maersk, the world's largest container shipping company, has their world headquarters in Copenhagen. A substantial number of Danish pharmaceuticals such as Novo Nordisk, Ferring Pharmaceuticals and Bavarian Nordic also operate in the area, having placed their headquarters in or close to Copenhagen.  USATODAY.com

Copenhagen has some of the highest gross wages in the World.  City Mayors: World's richest cities   High taxes mean that wages are reduced after mandatory deduction. A neneficial researcher scheme with low taxation of foreigh specialists  Level of salary in Denmark  has made Denmark an attractive location for highly educated foreign labour to settle. Copenhagen is however also among the most expensive cities in Europe.  City Mayors: World's most expensive cities (EIU)    City Mayors: World's most expensive cities - Ranking



Copenhagen University
Copenhagen has a well-developed higher education system of public universities. Most prominent among these is the University of Copenhagen. Founded in 1479, it is the oldest university in Denmark. It is a world-renowned research and teaching institution with campuses around the city and forms part of the International Alliance of Research Universities (IARU), which is a collaboration between international top  universities including Oxford, Cambridge, Yale and Berkeley. The University attracts app. 1500 international and exchange students every year.    It is repeatedly ranked as one of the best universities in Europe. At the Times Higher Education's QS World University Rankings 2008 list, it was ranked as fourth best in continental Europe.    TheAcademic Ranking of World Universities 2008 placesd it as number 43 worldwide and 8th in Europe.    A second all-round university in the Copenhagen area is Roskilde University located in Roskilde.

The Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, is located in Lyngby at the northern outskirts of Copenhagen. In 2008 it was ranked third highest in Europe on Times Higher Education's list of the most influential technical universities in the World. The Max Planck Institute in Germany was ranked 15, ETH Zurich in Switzerland was ranked 15 and DTU in Denmark was ranked 20.

Copenhagen Business School (CBS) is an estimed and  EQUIS accredited business school located on Frederiksberg.



Copenhagen is rich in companies and institutions with a focus on research and development within the biotechnology   , Infrastructure & logistics - Copenhagen a distribution hub, retrieved February 22, 2007.  and life science sectors. Two of the 50 largest pharmaceutical and biotech companies in the World are located in the greater Copenhagen area. The biotech and life science  cluster in Copenhagen and the rest of the Oresund Region is one of the strongest in Europe. Since 1995 this has been branded as the Medicon Valley in a Danish-Swedish cooperation. The aim is to strengthen the region's position and to promote cooperation between companies and    academia. The German biotech giant Sartorius Stedim Biotech, which is currently creating a Nordic head office in Tåstrup on the outskirts of Copenhagen. The Øresund region is responsible for 60 percent of life science production in Scandinavia and is home to 111 biotech companies.




The greater Copenhagen area has a very well established transportation infrastructure making it a hub in Northern Europe. 
Christianshavns Kanal


Copenhagen has a large network of toll-free highways and public roads connecting different municipalities of the city together and to Northern Europe.    As in many other cities in Europe traffic is increasing in Copenhagen. The radial arterial roads and highways leading to the Copenhagen city center are critically congested during peak hours.




Copenhagen is known as one of the most bicycle-friendly cities in the world.    Every day 1,1 million km are bicycled in Copenhagen.    36 % of all citizens are commuting to work, school or university by bicycle    and it is municipal policy that this number should go up to 40 % by 2012 and 50 % in 2015.

The city's bicycle paths are extensive and well-used. Bicycle paths are often separated from the main traffic lanes and sometimes have their own signal systems.

The municipality is also developing a system of interconnected green bicycle routes, greenways, with the aim to facilitate fast, safe and pleasant bicycle transport from one end of the city to the other. The network will cover more than 100 km and consist of 22 routes when finished.

The city provides public bicycles which can be found throughout the downtown area and used with a returnable deposit of 20 kroner.

Copenhagen's well-developed bicycle culture has given rise to the term ‘copenhagenize’. This is the practice of other cities adopting Copenhagen-style bike lanes and bicycle infrastructure.    In 2007 Copenhagen-based Danish urban design consultant Jan Gehl was hired by the New York City Department of Transportation to re-imagine New York City streets by introducing designs to improve life for pedestrians and cyclists.

In recognition of Copenhagen's emphasis on bicycling, the city has been chosen by the Union Cycliste Internationale as their first official Bike City. Bike City Copenhagen will take place from 2008 to 2011 and consist of big cycling events for professionals as well as amateurs.



The harbour of Copenhagen has largely lost its importance as an industrial harbour. In 2001 Copenhagen Harbour merged with the harbour in Malmö to create Copenhagen-Malmö Port. It has several functions, the most important being as a major cruise destination. In 2007 a record 286 cruise ships with 420,000 cruise passengers visited Copenhagen. 120 of these ships either started or ended the cruise in Copenhagen.    In 2008 these numbers grew further to 310 cruise ships and 560,000 passengers.    As a result of the growth in the cruise industry facilities asre being expanded and improved.    At the World Travel Awards in 2008, Copenhagen Port was named the number one cruise destination in Europe for the fifth year in a row.

Copenhagen is serviced by ferry lines to Oslo in Norway (called "Oslobåden") with a daily connection    and to Świnoujście in Poland (called "Polensfærgerne") with five weekly connections.



Copenhagen Airport is the principal airport serving Copenhagen. It is the largest in Scandinavia and the 17th largest in Europe.    It is located in Kastrup on the island of Amager and has very efficient connections to downtown Copenhagen with metro trains going to Kongens Nytorv in 15 minutes with 4-6 minutes between departures and regional trains going to the Central Station in 12 minutes. Its location also makes it the most important international airport for large parts of southern Sweden. Over the Øresund Bridge trains go to Malmö South in 14 minutes or Malmö Central Station in 22 minutes.    Copenhagen Airport has won the award as "The best airport in Europe" four times, and as "The best airport in the world" two times. Copenhagen Airport is the seventh best airport in the world - second best in Europe - when you ask the passengers. The British organization Skytrax is doing so every year, writes the airport in a press release. 40 criteria are employed for the ranking.



The new metro
S-train at Nørreport
Metro entrance in FrederiksbergThe public transportation system of Copenhagen consists of commuter trains (called S-trains, S-tog), buses, and a metro. The S-trains form the basis of the transportation network, stretching to most areas of metropolitan Copenhagen, with their main hub at Copenhagen Central Station (København H). Regional trains supplement the S-train services with lines extending further such as to the Copenhagen Airport, Elsinore, and Malmö. The Danish State Railways' Intercity network has its eastern terminus and main hub at Copenhagen, with most trains extending to Copenhagen Airport.

The fare system is based on 95 zones covering the capital area. Tickets are transferable from one means of transport to another within a time limit. The more zones a ticket is valid for, the longer its time validity with a maximum of two hours.
Discount cards (punch cards, klippekort) and period cards are available. Ticket prices are high and have increased substantially in recent years leading to a decrease in passenger numbers.  In fact, the percentage of trips made on public transportation in Copenhagen is quite low by northern European standards.

The Copenhagen Metro began operation in 2002 and currently has only two lines. In April 2008, it was named Best Metro in the World by industry experts.  Copenhagen Metro Best in the World

|Christiansborg Palace - home of the Danish Parliament Folketinget, the Supreme Court, Office of the Prime Minister and official reception area of Queen Margrethe II
|-
|Børsen - the former Stock Exchange building
|-
|The Little Mermaid statue in Copenhagen harbor
|-
|Amalienborg Palace - home of the Danish royal family. The central building is the domed Marble Church located behind the palace complex
|-
|Nyhavn
|-
|The Marble Church
|-
|Rosenborg Castle in central Copenhagen
|-
|Christianshavns Canal
|-
|The Tivoli, photographed from Eduard Spelterini's balloon on June 22, 1922
|}



Copenhagen is recognized as one of the most environmentally friendly cities in the world.    In 2006 Copenhagen Municipality received the European Environmental Management Award.    The award was given for long-term holistic environmental planning.

It is municipal policy to reduce CO2 emissions by 20% before the end of 2015.    In 2001 a large offshore wind farm was built just off the coast of Copenhagen at Middelgrunden. It produces about 4 % of the city's energy.

Many years of major investments in sewage treatment has improved water quality in the harbour to an extent that the inner harbour can be used for swimming and facilities for this are provided at a number of locations.

Another municipal policy is that 40% of all citizens should bicycle to and from work by 2012 and a number of initiatives are being taken to implement this policy (see "bicycling above").

Copenhagen is the capital in the World where organic food has the largest market share. One in every ten purchases is organic in Copenhagen.    Within the municipal sector in Copenhagen, 45 % of all food consumption is organic but the target is considerably higher. With the environmental strategy "Environment Metropolis: Our Vision 2015" the politicians wish that solely organic food is to be served in 90 per cent of the Copenhagen old-age homes and residential homes for children and young persons in 2015..





Copenhagen has placed well in a number of international rankings, some of which are mentioned below.

* Copenhagen was ranked #1 as  Most Livable City in the World by international lifestyle magazine Monocle on their Top 25 Most Livable Cities 2008 list  Monocles page on Copenhagen 
* Worlds Best Design City 2008 also by Monocle.  Monocles page on Copenhagen 
*Monocle has also stated that Copenhagen is "Scandinavia's most desirable city".  By Stuart Husband Monocle Magazine Published: June 19, 2007  
*Copenhagen ranked #4 by Financial Times-owned FDi magazine on their list of Top50 European Cities of the Future after London, Paris and Berlin.  Top 50 European City of the Future 2008/09  In 2006/07 FDi Magazine named Copenhagen Scandinavian City of the Future  Scandinavian City of the Future 06/07  and in 2004/05 Copenhagen was named Northern European City of the Future ahead of other cities from Scandinavia, UK, Ireland and Benelux.  Northern European City of the Future 2004/05  
* In the 2008 Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index, published by MasterCard, Copenhagen was ranked 14th in the world and 1st in Scandinavia.    
*Copenhagen #1 out of 254 locations in the Location Ranking Survey performed by ECA International that has asked European experts where they prefer to be stationed worldwide.  Location Ranking Survey  
* Copenhagen was ranked #6 in Grist Magazine's "15 Green Cities" list in 2007 making Copenhagen the greenest capital of Scandinavia according to Grist Magazine.  15 Green Cities | Grist | Main Dish | 19 July 2007  
* Copenhagen is the capital in the World where organic food has the largest market share. One in every ten purchases is organic in Copenhagen.  World-champinions in organic food  
* The Copenhagen Metro has been named the Best Metro in the World by industry experts.  Copenhagen Metro Best in the World 
* Copenhagen is the worlds #7 most expensive city and #3 most expensive in Europe on the Forbes List.  Forbes-Worlds Most Expensive Cities List   
* Copenhagen is ranked #7 as Preferred City For Investment Projects.  Preferred City For Investment Projects   
* Copenhagen ranked 3rd in Western Europe in terms of attracting regional headquarters and distribution centers, only surpassed by London and Paris.   
* Copenhagen ranks #1 in the Global Earning Ranking. [h Global earning ranking ]  
* Copenhagen ranks as the 5th most popular city in the world for international meetings and conferences.  Style & Substance Danmark   
* Copenhagen ranks as one of the most attractive cities to live and work in Europe.  A great place to live   
* Copenhagen ranks 2nd in Europe for Quality of life according to a survey from 2005 by the international consultancy firm William Mercer.  A great place to live



* Morten Andersen, veteran NFL kicker
* Niels Bohr, physicist, Nobel laureate
* Aage Bohr, physicist, Nobel laureate (son of Niels Bohr)
* Victor Borge, entertainer
* August Bournonville, ballet choreographer
* Georg Brandes, critic
* Helena Christensen, supermodel
* Tove Ditlevsen, writer
* Carl Theodor Dreyer, movie director
* Vilhelm Hammershøi, painter
* Gus Hansen, poker player
* Iben Hjejle, actor
* Peter Høeg, writer
* Arne Jacobsen, designer
* Robert Jacobsen, painter
* J. C. Jacobsen, founder of Carlsberg Brewery
* Mathias Lauridsen, male topmodel
* Søren Kierkegaard, philosopher
* Bjørn Lomborg, Academic and Author of The Skeptical Environmentalist
* Lauritz Melchior, opera singer
* Mads Mikkelsen, actor
* Carl-Henning Pedersen, painter
* Lars von Trier, movie director
* Dan Turèll, writer
* Lars Ulrich, drummer and songwriter of the heavy-metal band Metallica
* Jørn Utzon, architect, designer of the Sydney Opera House
* Michael Laudrup, former international football player, former manager of Spanish Primera Division Football team Getafe.
* Peter Schmeichel, former international football player
* Bertel Thorvaldsen, sculpturer



Copenhagen is twinned with:
*   Paris in France  (partner city) 
*   Reykjavík in Iceland
*   Prague in Czech Republic  (unofficial partner city) 
*   San Francisco de Campeche in Mexico



* Municipal statistics:  NetBorger Kommunefakta, delivered from  KMD, also known as Kommunedata (Municipal Data)
* Municipal and county statistics:  Statistics Denmark statistikbanken.dk
* Demography:   Statistical Yearbook of Copenhagen (part English); ISBN 87-7024-230-5
* History and demography:   København Forslag til kommuneplan 1985; ISBN 87-88034-03-8




* Oresund Region
* Eurovision Song Contest 2001
* Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2003
* MTV Europe Music Awards 2006
* Transportation in Denmark
* Ports of the Baltic Sea



*  A Much Different Tourist Site and Cultural Guide about Copenhagen
*  Wonderful Copenhagen official tourism website
*  Copenhagen Capacity official investment agency of Copenhagen
*  
*  Official municipal website
*  City of Copenhagen Statistical Office
*  Krak searchable map


Budapest



Budapest ( , also  ;  ) is the capital city of Hungary.     As the largest city of Hungary, it serves as the country's principal political, cultural, commercial, industrial, and transportation center    and is considered an important hub in Central Europe.    In 2008, Budapest had 1,702,297 inhabitants   , down from a mid-1980s peak of 2.1 million, with an official agglomeration of 2,451,418   . The city covers an area of    within the city limits. Budapest became a single city occupying both banks of the river Danube with the unification on 17 November 1873, of right-bank (west) Buda and Óbuda (Old Buda) together with Pest on the left (east) bank. Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, Chronology pp. 15

Aquincum, originally a Celtic settlement,  was the direct ancestor of Budapest,    becoming the Roman capital of Lower Pannonia.    Magyars arrived in the territory    in the 9th century. Their first settlement was pillaged by the Mongols in 1241-42.    The re-established town became one of the centers of Renaissance humanist culture    in the 15th century.    Following nearly 150 years of Ottoman rule, Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, Chronology pp. 15   development of the region entered a new age of prosperity in the 18th and 19th centuries, and Budapest became a global city after the 1873 unification   . It also became the second capital of Austria-Hungary, a great power that dissolved in 1918. Budapest was the focal point of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, the Hungarian Soviet Republic of 1919, Operation Panzerfaust in 1944, the Battle of Budapest of 1945, and the Revolution of 1956.

Widely regarded as one of the most beautiful cities in Europe,       its World Heritage Sites include the banks of the Danube, the Buda Castle Quarter, Andrássy Avenue, and the Millennium Underground Railway, the first on the European continent.       In addition, the largest thermal water cave system in the world was discovered under Budapest in 2008.  /ref>

The city attracts over 20 million visitors a year.     The headquarters of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) will be in Budapest.




The first settlement on the territory of Budapest was Ak-Ink ( ) built by Celts  before the birth of Christ. It was later occupied by the Romans. The Roman settlement - Aquincum - became the main city of Lower Pannonia  in 106 AD . The Romans constructed roads, amphitheaters, baths and houses with heated floors in this fortified military camp   .

The Hungarians led by Árpád settled in the territory at the end of the 9th century Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, Chronology pp. 12   , and a century later officially founded the Kingdom of Hungary . Research places the probable residence of the Árpáds an early place of central power near what became Budapest.  Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, p. 14   The Tatar invasion in the 13th century quickly proved that defence is difficult on a plain  . King Béla IV of Hungary therefore ordered the construction of reinforced stone walls around the towns  and set his own royal palace  on the top of the protecting hills of Buda. In 1361  it became the capital of Hungary .

Buda Castle during the Middle Ages.
The cultural role of Buda was particularly significant during the reign of Matthias Corvinus of Hungary . The Italian Renaissance had a great influence on the city . His library, the Bibliotheca Corviniana , was Europe's greatest collection of historical chronicles and philosophic and scientific works in the 15th century, and second only in size to the Vatican Library . After the foundation of the first Hungarian university in Pécs in 1367    the second one was established in Óbuda in 1395 . The first Hungarian book was printed in Buda in 1473   .

The Turkish occupation lasted for more than 140 years . The Turks constructed some fine bathing facilities here . The unoccupied western part of the country became part of the Habsburg Empire as Royal Hungary. In 1686 Leopold I liberated Buda from the Ottomans but almost destroyed the city during the battle . Hungary was then incorporated into the Habsburg Empire .

The nineteenth century was dominated by the Hungarians' struggle for independence  and modernization. The national insurrection against the Habsburgs began in the Hungarian capital in 1848 and was defeated a little more than a year later.

The Hungarian State Opera House, built in the time of Austria-Hungary
1867 was the year of Reconciliation that brought about the birth of Austria-Hungary.

This made Budapest the twin capital of a dual monarchy. It was this compromise which opened the second great phase of development in the history of Budapest, lasting until World War I. In 1873 Buda and Pest were officially merged with the third part, Óbuda (Ancient Buda), thus creating the new metropolis of Budapest. The dynamic Pest grew into the country's administrative, political, economic, trade and cultural hub.

Cutaway Drawing of Millennium Underground in Budapest (1894-1896) which was the first underground in Continental Europe

World War I brought the Golden Age to an end. In 1918 Austria-Hungary lost the war and collapsed; Hungary declared itself an independent republic. In 1920 the Treaty of Trianon finalized the country's partition, as a result, Hungary lost over two-thirds of its territory, about two-thirds of its inhabitants under the treaty including 3.3 million out of 10 million ethnic Hungarians.

In 1944, towards the end of World War II, Budapest was partly destroyed by British and American air raids. From December 24, 1944 to February 13, 1945, the city was besieged during the Battle of Budapest. Budapest suffered major damage caused by the attacking Soviet troops and the defending German and Hungarian troops. All bridges were destroyed by the Germans. More than 38,000 civilians lost their lives during the conflict.

Between 20% and 40% of Greater Budapest's 250,000 Jewish inhabitants died through Nazi and Arrow Cross genocide during 1944 and early 1945.       Despite this, modern day Budapest has the highest number of Jewish citizens per capita of any European city.

In 1949, Hungary was declared a communist People's Republic. The new Communist government considered the buildings like the Buda Castle symbols of the former regime, and during the 1950s the palace was gutted and all the interiors were destroyed.

In 1956, peaceful demonstrations in Budapest led to the outbreak of the Hungarian Revolution. The Stalinist dictatorship collapsed after mass demonstrations, but Soviet tanks entered Budapest to crush the revolt. Fighting continued until early November, leaving more than 3000 dead.

From the 1960s to the late 1980s Hungary was often satirically referred to as "the happiest barrack" within the Eastern bloc, and much of the wartime damage to the city was finally repaired. Work on Erzsébet Bridge, the last to be rebuilt, was finished in 1965. In the early 1970s, Budapest Metro's East-West M2 line was first opened, followed by the M3 line in 1982. In 1987, Buda Castle and the banks of the Danube were included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites. Andrassy Avenue (including the Millennium Underground Railway, Hősök tere and Városliget) was added to the UNESCO list in 2002. In the 1980s the city's population reached 2.1 million. In recent times a significant decrease in habitants occured mainly due to a massive movement to the neighbouring agglomeration in Pest county.
In the last decades of the 20th century the political changes of 1989-90 concealed changes in civil society and along the streets of  Budapest. The monuments of the dictatorship were taken into a museum called Memento Park.



A view of Pest from the Buda side of the Danube
The 525km 2  area of Budapest lies in central Hungary surrounded by settlements of the agglomeration in Pest county. The capital extends 25 and 29 kilometers in the north-south, east-west direction respectively. The Danube enters the city from the north; later it encircles two islands, Óbuda Island and Margaret Island . The third island Csepel Island is the largest of the Budapest Danube islands, however only it's northernmost tip is within city limits. The river that separates the two parts of the city is only   wide at its narrowest point in Budapest. Pest lies on the flat terrain of the Great Plain while Buda is rather hilly . Pest's terrain rises with a slight eastward gradient, so the easternmost parts of the city lie at the same altitude as Buda's smallest hills, notably Gellért Hill and Castle Hill. The Buda hills consist mainly of limestone and dolomite, the water created speleothems, the most famous ones being the Pálvölgyi cave and the Szemlőhegyi cave. The hills were formed in the Triassic Era. The highest point of the hills and of Budapest is János hill, at 527 meters above sea level. The lowest point is the line of the Danube which is 96 meters above see level. The forests of Buda hills are environmentally protected.




Budapest has a temperate, transitional climate - somewhere between the mild, rainy weather of Transdanubia, the variable continental climate of the flat and open Great Plain to the east and the almost sub-Mediterranean weather of the south.   .



Population by nationalities according to the 2001 census,   :
*Hungarians - 1,631,043 (91.2%)
*Germans - 18,097 (1%)
*Roma - 14,019 (0.8%)
*Others (mainly Slovaks, Greeks, Romanians) - 21,691 
*No answer, unknown - 93,071



Population by denominations   :
*Roman Catholic - 808,460 (45.5%)
*Calvinist - 224,169 (12.6%)
*Lutheran - 46,449 (2.6%)
*Greek Catholic - 28,901 (1.6%)
*Jewish - 9,468 (0.5%)
*Atheist - 347,209 (19.5%)  
*Others (mainly Christian) - 26,681
*No answer, unknown - 286,584




In 1910 Budapest had 880,371 residents (85.9% Hungarian, 9% German, 2.3% Slovak, 2.8% other). Religions: 59.8% Roman Catholic, 23.1% Jewish, 9.9% Calvinist, 4.9% Lutheran, 2.3% other.  County maps of the Hungarian Kingdom (1913)




Originally Budapest had 10 districts after coming into existence upon the unification of the three cities in 1873. On 1 January, 1950 Budapest was united with several neighboring towns and the number of its districts was raised to 22 (Greater Budapest). At that time there were changes both in the order of districts and in their sizes. Now there are 23 districts, 6 in Buda, 16 in Pest and 1 on Csepel Island between them. Each district can be associated with one or more city parts named after former towns within Budapest.



Hungarian Parliament Building

The neo-Gothic Parliament, containing amongst other things the Hungarian Crown Jewels.
Saint Stephen's Basilica, where the Holy Right Hand of the founder of Hungary, King Saint Stephen is on display.
The  Hungarian cuisine and café culture: for example, Gerbeaud Café, and the Százéves, Biarritz, Fortuna, Alabárdos, Arany Szarvas, Kárpátia and the world famous Mátyás Pince Restaurants.
There are Roman remains at the Aquincum Museum, and historic furniture at the Nagytétény Castle Museum.

The Castle Hill, the River Danube embankments and the whole of Andrássy út have been officially recognized as UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
The Holy Crown of Hungary,  a key symbol of Hungary.
Castle Hill and the Castle District; there are three churches here, six museums, and a host of interesting buildings, streets and squares. The former Royal Palace is one of the symbols of Hungary – and has been the scene of battles and wars ever since the thirteenth century. Nowadays it houses two impressive museums and the National Széchenyi Library. The nearby Sándor Palace contains the offices and official residence of the President of Hungary. The seven-hundred year-old Matthias Church is one of the jewels of Budapest. Next to it is an equestrian statue of the first king of Hungary, King Saint Stephen, and behind that is the Fisherman's Bastion, from where opens out a panoramic view of the whole city.  Statues of the Turul, the mythical guardian bird of Hungary, can be found in both the Castle District and the Twelfth District.

In Pest, arguably the most important sight is Andrássy út. As far as Kodály Körönd and Oktogon both sides are lined with large shops and flats built close together. Between there and Heroes’ Square the houses are detached and altogether grander. Under the whole runs continental Europe’s oldest Underground railway, most of whose stations retain their original appearance. Heroes’ Square is dominated by the Millenary Monument, with the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in front. To the sides are the Museum of Fine Arts and the Palace of Arts, and behind City Park opens out, with Vajdahunyad Castle. One of the jewels of Andrássy út is the Hungarian State Opera House. Statue Park, a theme park with striking statues of the Communist era, is located just outside the main city and is accessible by public transport.

The city is home to the largest synagogue in Europe (Dohány Street Synagogue)   , the largest medicinal bath in Europe (Széchenyi Medicinal Bath) and the third largest Parliament building in the world, once the largest in the world. The third largest church in Europe (Esztergom Basilica) and the second largest Baroque castle in the world (Gödöllő) are in the vicinity.



Széchenyi Thermal Bath

Seven islands can be found on the Danube: Hajógyári sziget (literal translation: Shipyard Island), Margit-sziget (Margaret Island), and Csepel sziget (the northernmost part of this island belonging to Budapest is a separate district of the city, the XXI., while the other islands are parts of other districts, the III. and XIII. respectively), Palotai-sziget (in fact, it's a peninsula today), Népsziget (connected to the above, but mostly surrounded by water), Háros-sziget and Molnár-sziget.

Notable islands:
*Margit-sziget is a   long island and   in area. The island mostly consists of a park and is a popular recreational area for tourists and locals alike. The island lies between bridges Margaret Bridge (south) and Árpád Bridge (north). Dance clubs, Swimming pools, an Aqua park, athletic and fitness centres, bicycle and running tracks can be found around the Island. During the day the island is occupied by people doing sports, or just resting. In the summer (generally on the weekends) mostly young people go to the island at night to party in its terraces, or to recreate with a bottle of alcohol on a bench or on the grass (this form of entertainment is sometimes referred to as bench-partying).
*Csepel-sziget [ˈtʃɛpɛlsigɛt] or Csepel Island is the largest island of the River Danube in Hungary. It is   long; its width is 6–8 km (3.75 5 mi) and its area comprises  , whereas only the northern tip is inside the city limits.
*Hajógyári-sziget [ˈhɒjo:ɟa:ri sigɛt] (or Óbudai-sziget) is a man built island, located in the third district. This island hosts many activities such as: wake-boarding, jet-skiing during the day, and dance clubs during the night. This is the island where the famous Sziget Festival takes place, hosting hundreds of  performances per year and now around 400,000 visitors in its last edition. Many building projects are taking place to make this island into one of the biggest entertainment centres of Europe, the plan is to build Apartment buildings, hotels, casinos and a marina.
*Luppa-sziget is the smallest island of Budapest, located in the north region.



Budapest Ferihegy International Airport 
Budapest Ferihegy International Airport, which has 3 passenger terminals: Ferihegy 1, which tends to serve the many discount airlines now flying to and from Budapest, Ferihegy 2/A and Ferihegy 2/B. Terminal 2/C is planned to be built. The airport is located to the east of the centre in the XVIII. district in Pestszentlőrinc.



Budapest is the most important Hungarian road terminus; all the major highways end there. Budapest is also a major railway terminus.

Ring road M0 around Budapest is made and allows people to go around Budapest from East to West and from North to South, however there is no way from West to North - you only need to go around to the South.




Map of the Budapest Metro
Budapest public transport is provided by BKV   , the company operates buses, trolleybuses, trams, suburban railway lines, the metro, a boat service, a cogwheel railway and a chairlift, called Libegő.

Budapest's tram network is extensive, and reliable despite poor track infrastructure and an ageing fleet. Routes 4 and 6 combined form the busiest traditional city tram line in the world, with the world's longest passenger trams (  long  Siemens Combino) running at 60 to 90 second intervals at peak time and 3–4 minutes off-peak and usually packed with people.

Day services operate from 4:30 a.m. until 11:30 p.m. each day. Night traffic (a reduced overnight service) has a reputation for being excellent .

There are three metro lines and a fourth is currently under construction.  The Yellow line, built in 1896, is one of the oldest subway lines in the world, following London Underground and the Istanbul Metro that were built respectively in 1863 and 1875.



Budapest Castle Hill Funicular 
Beside metros, suburban rails, buses, trams and boats, there are a couple of less usual vehicles in Budapest:
* trolleybus (trolibusz) on several lines in Pest
* funicular (sikló); the Castle Hill Funicular between the Chain Bridge and Buda Castle
* cyclecar (bringóhintó) for rent in Margaret Island
* chairlift (libegő)
* rack railway (fogaskerekű vasút); the Budapest Cog-wheel Railway 
* children's railway (gyermekvasút) 
The latter three vehicles run among Buda hills.




Hungarian main-line railways are operated by MÁV. There are three main railway termini in Budapest, Keleti (eastern), Nyugati (westbound), and Déli (southbound), operating both domestic and international rail services. Budapest was one of the main stops of the Orient Express until 2001, when the service was cut back to Paris-Vienna.
Nyugati Railway Station 
There is also a suburban rail service in and around Budapest, operated under the name HÉV.



The river Danube flows through Budapest on its way to the Black Sea. The river is easily navigable and so Budapest has historically been a major commercial port (at Csepel). In the summer months a scheduled hydrofoil service operates up the Danube to Vienna.



Budapest University of Technology and Economics
Budapest is Hungary's main centre of education and home to many universities

*Budapest University of Technology and Economics
*Corvinus University of Budapest
*Eötvös Loránd University
*Semmelweis University (medical university)
*Szent István University, Faculty of Veterinary Science
*Budapest Business School

*Pázmány Péter Catholic University
*Károli Gáspár University of the Hungarian Reformed Church
*Jewish Theological Seminary – University of Jewish Studies

*Central European University
*Andrássy Gyula German Language University of Budapest

*Moholy-Nagy University of Art and Design
*Franz Liszt Academy of Music



Anfiteatrum in Aquincum, the capital of Pannonia.
Buda Castle
The tomb of the Turkish dervish Gül Baba in Budapest
The Recapture of Buda Castle (1686)
Buda and Pest (ca. 1850)
Andrássy Avenue (1896)
Széchenyi Chain Bridge, Danube, Gresham Palace, Saint Stephen's Basilica



Keleti Railway Station

Some of the city's districts are also twinned to small cities or districts of other big cities, for details see the article 
List of districts and towns in Budapest.




*   DK Publishing, Budapest: Eyewitness Travel Guildes. DK Travel, 2007. ISBN 978-0756624354 
*   Annabel Barber, Visible Cities Budapest: A City Guide. Somerset, Ltd., 2004. ISBN 978-9632129860 
*   Krisztian Ungvary (Author), John Lukacs (Foreword), The Siege of Budapest: One Hundred Days in World War II. Yale University Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0300119855 
*



*List of cemeteries in Budapest
*List of famous people of Budapest
*Music of Budapest
*Urban and Suburban Transit Association (most of its activity is centred around Budapest)
*Budapest metropolitan area




*  Official homepage
*  Budapest Tourist Office
*  Public transport in Budapest
*  MÁV-Start Railway Passenger Transport Co.
*





Helsinki



Helsinki (in Finnish;  ), or Helsingfors (in Swedish;  ) is the capital and largest city of Finland. It is in the southern part of Finland, on the shore of the Gulf of Finland, by the Baltic Sea. The population of the city of Helsinki is   ( ),  making it the most populous municipality in Finland by a wide margin. The foreign-born population stands at around 10%.

Helsinki, along with the neighbouring cities of Vantaa (Vanda), Espoo (Esbo), and Kauniainen (Grankulla), constitutes what is known as the capital region, with over 1,000,000 inhabitants. The Greater Helsinki area contains 12 municipalities and has a population of over 1,300,000.  The Greater Helsinki accounts for a quarter of the population of Finland, 29% of jobs, and a third of the GDP.

Helsinki is Finland's capital for business, education, research, culture, and government. Greater Helsinki has eight universities and six technology parks.  Helsinki region in brief  Some 70% of foreign companies operating in Finland have settled in the Helsinki region.  The immigration of rural residents has made it one of the fastest growing metropolitan areas in Europe.

Finland's main international airline hub, Helsinki-Vantaa Airport is 40 minutes from the city center, with direct flights around the world. The busy Helsinki–Tallinn route takes 1.5 hours by sea and 18 minutes by helicopter. Two other big cities in Finland, Tampere and Turku, can be reached in 1.5–2 hours by train  VR Passenger Service   and 1.5–2.5 hours by car.




The Swedish name   (  or  ) is the original name of the city of Helsinki, and is still the official Swedish name for the city. The Finnish name, Helsinki (pronounced with the stress on the first syllable:  ), has been dominant in other languages for decades. The Swedish name Helsingfors comes from the name of the surrounding parish, Helsinge (source for Finnish Helsinki) and the rapids (in Swedish: fors), which flowed through the original town. It is often thought that the name Helsinge was given by the Swedish immigrants who came from the Swedish province of Hälsingland. Another explanation is that the names Helsingborg and Helsingør have derived from the Scandinavian word hals (neck), referring to the narrowest part of the river, i.e. the rapids   Utbildning & Vetenskap: Svenskfinland  .

In Helsinki slang the town is also called Stadi (from the Swedish word stad, meaning city) and Hesa in colloquial Finnish.   is the North Sami name of Helsinki.



Central Helsinki in 1820 before rebuilding. Drawing by Carl Ludvig Engel.

Founded in 1550 as a rival to the Hanseatic city of Reval (today: Tallinn) by King Gustav I of Sweden, the town of Helsinki struggled in its infancy. The fledgling settlement was plagued by poverty, wars, and diseases. For a long time it remained a small coastal town, overshadowed by the more thriving trade centers in the Baltic region. The construction of the Sveaborg (In Finnish Viapori, today also Suomenlinna) naval fortress helped improve its status, but it was not until Russia defeated Sweden in the Finnish War and annexed Finland as the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland in 1809 that Helsinki began to develop into a major city.

In order to reduce Swedish influence in Finland, Czar Alexander I of Russia moved the capital from Turku, which had close ties to Sweden, to Helsinki. The Royal Academy of Turku, back then the only university in the country, was relocated to Helsinki in 1827 and eventually became the modern University of Helsinki. The move consolidated the city's new role, and the following decades saw unprecedented growth and development for the city, creating the prerequisites for the birth of the modern world class capital in the 20th century. This transformation is highly apparent in the downtown core, which was rebuilt in neoclassical style to resemble St. Petersburg. As elsewhere, technological advancements such as railroads and industrialization were a key factor behind the growth.



In the 1918 Finnish Civil War, Helsinki fell to the Red Guard on January 28, the first day of the war. The Red side gained control of the whole of southern Finland after minor hostilities. The Senate was relocated to Vaasa, although some senators and officials remained in hiding in the capital. After the tide of war turned against the Red forces, German troops fighting on the side of the Finnish White Guard recaptured Helsinki in April 1918. Unlike Tampere, Helsinki suffered relatively little damage in the war. After the White victory many former Red soldiers and collaborators were confined in prison camps across the country. The largest camp, having approximately 13,300 prisoners, was located on the former naval fortress island of Suomenlinna in Helsinki. Although the civil war left a considerable scar on the society, the standard of living in the country and the city began to improve in the following decade.  Renowned architects such as Eliel Saarinen created utopistic plans for Helsinki, but they were never realized to full extent.

In the aerial bombings of the Winter War (1939–40) and the Continuation War (1941–44) Helsinki was attacked by Soviet bombers. The most intense air raids took place in the spring of 1944, when over two thousand Soviet planes dropped some 16,000 bombs in and around the city. However, due to successful air defense the city was spared from the large-scale destruction that many other cities in Europe under bombings of similar scale suffered. Only a small number of bombs hit populated areas.

Despite the tumultuous first half of the 20th century, Helsinki continued to develop steadily.  The rapid urbanization of the 1970s, which occurred relatively late in the European context, tripled the population in the metropolitan area, making the Helsinki metropolitan area one of the fastest growing urban centers in the European Union in the 1990s. The relatively sparse population density of Helsinki and its peculiar structure have often been attributed to the lateness of the urbanisation. Thus today the Helsinki metropolitan area is the second most sparsely populated EU-capital after Brussels.  1 January 2007, Hufvudstadsbladet – Helsingfors en metropol om hundra år. Citing Professors Ache (metropolitan planning, Helsinki University of Technology) and Vaatovaara (University of Helsinki), and statistics from The European Economic Research Consortium



Suomenlinna has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1991.
Helsinki seen from Spot Satellite

Helsinki is spread across a number of bays and peninsulas and over a number of islands. The inner city area occupies a southern peninsula, which is rarely referred to by its actual name Vironniemi. Population density in certain parts of Helsinki's inner city area is very high, reaching   in the district of Kallio, but as a whole Helsinki's population density of   ranks it as quite sparsely populated in comparison to other European capital cities. Much of Helsinki outside the inner city area consists of postwar suburbs separated from each other by patches of forests. A narrow, ten kilometer (6.2 mi) long Helsinki Central Park that stretches from the inner city to the northern border of Helsinki is an important recreational area for residents.

Some notable islands in Helsinki include Seurasaari, Lauttasaari and Korkeasaari   which is also the country's biggest zoo   as well as the fortress island of Suomenlinna (Sveaborg) and the military island of Santahamina.




The city has a temperate continental climate. Owing to the mitigating influence of the Baltic sea and Gulf stream, temperatures in winter are much higher than the northern location might suggest, with the average in January and February around −5 °C. Temperatures below −20 °C occur normally only for a week or two in a year. However, because of the latitude, days lasts less than six hours in the winter solstice, and the very cloudy weather accentuates the darkness. Conversely, Helsinki enjoys long days in summer, almost nineteen hours at the summer solstice. The average maximum temperature June through August is around 19 to 21 °C.

Climate in 2007 in Helsinki city center (summer temperatures are not very hot and winter temperatures not very cold because of its location near the sea):



The view across summertime Kaisaniemenlahti.
The Helsinki Cathedral is probably the most prominent building and symbol of the city.
Parliament of Finland on the right, and new supplemental offices on the left.
Carl Ludvig Engel (1778–1840) designed several neo-classical buildings in Helsinki. He was kept in Helsinki by a unique assignment, as he was elected to plan a new city centre all on his own. The city became shallow and wide at the time when most buildings had only two or three floors. The central point of Engel's city plan is the Senate Square, surrounded by the Government's Palace, the main building of the University, and the enormous Cathedral, which was finished in 1852, twelve years after C. L. Engel's death. Engels' neo-classical plan of the city centre has later given Helsinki the epithet The White City Of The North.

Helsinki is, however, perhaps even more famous for its numerous Art Nouveau (Jugend in Finnish) buildings, designed in the early 1900s and strongly influenced by the Kalevala, which is a very popular theme in the national romantic art of that era. Helsinki's Art Nouveau style is also featured in large residential areas such as Katajanokka and Ullanlinna. The master of the Finnish Art Nouveau was Eliel Saarinen (1873–1950), whose architectural masterpiece was the Helsinki central railway station.

Helsinki also features several buildings by the world-renowned Finnish architect Alvar Aalto (1898–1976), attributed as one of the pioneers in functionalism. Many of Aalto's works are either loved or hated. Aalto's buildings, such as the headquarters of the paper company Enso and the concert and congress house Finlandia Hall, have sparked much debate amongst Helsinki's inhabitants.

In addition to Aalto's work, there is a body of other noteworthy functionalist architecture in Helsinki, such as the Olympic Stadium, the Tennis Palace, the Rowing Stadium, the Swimming Stadium, the Velodrome, the Glass Palace, the Exhibition Hall (now Töölö Sports Hall) and Helsinki-Malmi Airport. The sports venues were built to serve the 1940 Helsinki Olympic Games (canceled due to the Second World War), but eventually got to fulfill their purpose in the 1952 Olympic Games. Many of them are listed by DoCoMoMo as significant examples of modern architecture. The Olympic Stadium and Helsinki-Malmi Airport are in addition catalogued by the National Board of Antiquities as cultural-historical environments of national significance.

During the 1960s and 1970s many aesthetically and historically important houses were swiftly demolished to make room for the rapidly expanding city and instead houses presenting more values of functionalism were built. This has later been widely regarded as a bad move and has led to a strong protectionism of old buildings in Helsinki. The plans made during the era of rapid growth expected Helsinki to have well over one million inhabitants at the turn of the millennium. Much due to the strong protectionism of today there are still many areas left with distinctive old wooden houses, such as Käpylä, Kumpula, Toukola and Puu-Vallila.

As a historical footnote, Helsinki's neoclassical buildings were often used as a backdrop for scenes set to take place in the Soviet Union in many Cold War era Hollywood movies. Some of the more notable ones are The Kremlin Letter (1970), Reds (1981) and Gorky Park (1983). Because some of the streetscapes were reminiscent of Leningrad's and Moscow's old buildings, they were used in the production - much to some residents' dismay. At the same time the government secretly briefed its white-collar workers to make producing these, often clearly Soviet-negative, films in Helsinki as hard as possible due to diplomatic pressure from Moscow. Finnish Department of Foreign Affairs,




Helsinki has eighty-five members in its city council. The three largest parties are National Coalition (26), Greens (21), and Social Democrats (16).



The population of Helsinki is predominantly Finnish-speaking, with a sizable Swedish-speaking minority ( ). Also, 6.4% of the population are foreign citizens, and   have a first language other than Finnish or Swedish.

The city has Finland's largest immigrant population in both absolute and relative terms. There are people of over 130 nationalities resident in Helsinki. The largest groups are from Russia, Estonia, Sweden, but also large numbers of residents from Somalia, Serbia, China, India, Iraq and Germany.



Kamppi Center is a shopping and transportation complex in the Kamppi district in the centre of Helsinki.

The Helsinki metropolitan area generates approximately one third of Finland's GDP. 
GDP per capita is roughly 1.5 times the national average, making Helsinki one of the wealthiest capitals in Europe. In 2004, the local economy grew by 3.2%. Helsinki's GDP per capita is one of the highest of any city in the world.

Since the 1950s, the economy has become largely service-based, although industries such as shipbuilding continue to employ a substantial number of people. Large service-based employers include the public sector and the information technology sector. Helsinki has many staffing agencies.

The metropolitan area is the location of choice for the headquarters of large Finnish companies as well as the regional headquarters of international companies. The Helsinki metropolitan area has the best availability of highly skilled employees in Finland, and good infrastructure and business support systems. Since June 2007, the city centre has hosted the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), which has led to the relocation of several hundred international experts and their families to Helsinki.

The distribution of affluent to middle and working class neighbourhoods is relatively even in Helsinki. Expensive real estate is located on the main peninsula as well as on the coastline from west to east. Some neighbourhoods in the northwest and eastern parts show slightly higher unemployment levels and have more immigrants. Helsinki is also losing companies to Espoo  . Improving the economy of Helsinki and cooperation between the municipalities of the Helsinki conurbation are seen as major future challenges for the economic development of the region.

Helsinki's population growth has been steady for some time even though intra-areal migration has favoured Espoo and surrounding areas uptil very recently. The population of Greater Helsinki grew by   in 2007 alone.  Helsinki Region Trends 2008, City of Helsinki  The fastest growing area is the countryside belt between Ingå, Kirkkonummi, Vihti and Nurmijärvi and Pornainen, though absolute numbers were in hundreds between 2000–2004. Between 2000–2004 net migration in Helsinki was negative at −330 residents. 20–30 year olds compose a rough fifth of the population of Helsinki as opposed to a mere 14 percent in Finland as a whole.

The tap water is of excellent quality and it is supplied by   long Päijänne Water Tunnel, the world's longest continuous rock tunnel. Bottled Helsinki tap water is even sold to countries such as Saudi Arabia.  Bottled water sells, Finnfacts

The employment rate in the Helsinki metropolitan area stands at around 75% and employment growth has been good. Around 20% work in manufacturing and construction, compared to 10% in London and 30% in Milan. In private-sector services the distribution is that 34.5% work in trade, 17% in transport, 8% in hotels and restaurants, 5.7% in financial services, and 34.5% in other market services.

The metropolitan area's gross value-added per capita is 200% of the mean of 27 European metropolitan areas. It equals Stockholm or Paris. The gross value-added annual growth has been around 4%.  The Regional Economy of Helsinki from a European Perspective

83 of the 100 largest Finnish companies are headquartered in Greater Helsinki. Two-thirds of the 200 highest-paid Finnish executives live in Greater Helsinki and 42% in Helsinki. The average income of the top 50 earners was 1.65 million euro.  Helsingin Sanomat – International Edition – Metro



Main building of the University of Helsinki.
Haaga-Helia University of Applied Sciences is the largest business polytechnic in Finland.
Helsinki has 190 comprehensive schools, 41 upper secondary schools and 15 vocational institutes. Half of the 41 upper secondary schools are private or state-owned, the other half municipal. Higher level education is given in eight universities (see the section "Universities" below) and four polytechnics.




*University of Helsinki
*Helsinki University of Technology (located in neighbouring Espoo)
*Helsinki School of Economics
*Hanken School of Economics
*Academy of Fine Arts
*Sibelius Academy
*Theatre Academy
*University of Art and Design Helsinki
*National Defence University



*Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences
*Helsinki Polytechnic Arcada
*Helsinki Business Polytechnic (Helia)



Kiasma is a contemporary art museum located at the heart of Helsinki.

The biggest historical museum in Helsinki is the National Museum of Finland, which displays a vast historical collection from prehistoric times to the 21st century. The museum building itself, a national romantic style neo-medieval castle, is a tourist attraction. Other major historical museum is the Helsinki City Museum, which introduces visitors to Helsinki's 500 year history. The University of Helsinki also has many significant museums, including the University Museum and the Natural History Museum.

The Finnish National Gallery consists on three museums: Ateneum Art Museum for classical Finnish art, Sinebrychoff Art Museum for classical European art, and Kiasma Art Museum for modern art. The old Ateneum, a neo-renaissance palace from 19th century, is one of the city's major historical buildings, whereas the highly modern Kiasma is probably the most debated building in Helsinki.

Helsinki has three major theatres: The Finnish National Theatre, the Helsinki City Theatre, and the Finland Swedish Svenska Teatern. The city's main musical venues are the Finnish National Opera and the Finlandia concert-hall. Bigger concerts and events are usually held at one of the city's two big ice hockey arenas: the Hartwall Areena or the Helsinki Ice Hall. Helsinki has Finland's largest fair centre.

Helsinki is considered as one of the main hubs of popular music in Northern Europe, many widely renowned and acclaimed bands have originated in Helsinki, including Norther, Wintersun, Ensiferum, HIM, The Rasmus, The 69 Eyes, Hanoi Rocks, Apocalyptica and Stratovarius.



* The Helsinki Festival is an annual arts and culture festival, which takes place every August (including the Night of the Arts).
* Valon Voimat "Forces of Light" is an annual winter arts festival.
*Vappu "Vappu" is an annual carnival for students and workers.

Helsinki hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, the first ever Eurovision Song Contest arranged in Finland.



The Helsinki Olympic Stadium was the center of activities during the 1952 Summer Olympics.

Helsinki has a long tradition of sports: the city gained much of its initial international recognition during the 1952 Summer Olympics, and the city has since then been very open to arranging sporting events. Helsinki hosts fairly successful local teams in both of the most popular team sports in Finland, football and ice hockey. The latter is a sport of passion for many Helsinki residents, who usually take a stance for either of the local clubs HIFK or Jokerit. The strong culture of ice hockey has led to Helsinki becoming the birthplace of many legendary National Hockey League stars such as Teemu Selänne, Jari Kurri and Esa Tikkanen. Helsinki also houses HJK, Finland's largest and most successful football club.



Helsinki region roads.
Helsinki has several ring roads: Kehä I, Kehä II, and Kehä III. From central city to east and west, there are Itäväylä and Länsiväylä. From the central city to north, there are several routes. There is a proposal to build a Stockholm-like tunnel under the central Helsinki to hide cars from streets. Central Helsinki has popular underground parking facilities.

Helsinki has some 390 cars per 1000 inhabitants.  This is Helsinki, by City of Helsinki  This is less than in cities of similar density, for instance, Brussels' 483 per 1000 and Stockholm's 401, and Oslo's 413.  /ref>  Tietokeskus: suunnatframe




The Helsinki Metro with its characteristic bright orange trains is the world's northernmost subway.

Public transportation is generally a hotly debated subject in the local politics of Helsinki. In Helsinki, public transportation is mostly managed under Helsinki City Transport, the city's transportation authority. The diverse public transport system consists of trams, light commuter rail, the subway, bus lines and two ferry lines. The Helsinki Metropolitan Area Council manages traffic to the surrounding municipalities of Espoo, Vantaa and Kauniainen.

Today, Helsinki is the only city in Finland to have trams or subway trains. There used to be two other cities in Finland with trams: Turku and Viipuri (Vyborg, now in Russia), but both have since abandoned trams. The Helsinki Metro, opened in the year 1982, is so far the only subway system in Finland. In 2006, the construction of the long debated extension of the subway system west into Espoo was approved, and serious debate about an eastern extension into Sipoo has taken place.  www.lansimetro.fi – an information portal dedicated to the "länsimetro" subway expansion in the Helsinki capital region.



Malmi airport, one of the oldest in the world and Finland's main general aviation airport.
Air traffic is handled primarily from the international Helsinki-Vantaa Airport, located approximately   north of Helsinki's downtown area, in the neighbouring city of Vantaa. The airport provides scheduled non-stop flights to many important cities in Europe, Asia and North America. Helsinki's second airport, Malmi Airport, is mainly used for general and private aviation.



Ferry connections to Tallinn and Stockholm are serviced by various companies. Finnlines passenger-freight ferries to Travemünde, Germany are also available, while Tallink began service to Rostock, Germany in 2007. Copterline has provided fast (18 min.) helicopter flights to Tallinn.




Image:Suomenlinna.jpg|Kustaanmiekka strait through Suomenlinna Sea Fortress in middle of may.
Image:Tower of the Helsinki Olympic Stadium.jpg|Helsinki Olympic Stadium Tower, offers a good view over Helsinki.
Image:FinlandParliament.jpg|Wall of Parliament House
Image:Helsinki Railway Station 20050604.jpg|Helsinki Central railway station.
Image:Hesakirkot--GFDL--.jpg|Rooftops of the southern inner city districts.
Image:FinnishNationalTheatreFromSouth.jpg|Finnish National Theatre.
Image:Helsinkimerelta--GFDL--.jpg|Port of Helsinki
Image:Uspenski_Cathedral_Helsinki.jpg|The Uspenski Orthodox cathedral.
Image:Temppeliaukio Church 3.jpg|Altar of Temppeliaukio Church that is built underground.
Image:Hietaniemi beach.jpg|Hietaniemi beach. 
Image:Esplanadin puisto.jpg|The Esplanadi Park in central Helsinki in early june.
Image:Senaatintori joulukuisena aamuna 2004.jpg|The Senaatintori square on a winter morning in december.
Image:Stockmann department store in Helsinki at dawn in December 2004.jpg|Stockmann department store along the Aleksanterinkatu's Christmas street.
Image:Helsinki_Market.JPG|Helsinki market square in winter.
Image:National_Museum_of_Finland.jpg|The National Museum of Finland is located in Helsinki.
Image:Helsinki Pohjoisranta.jpg|The Pohjoisranta at night.
Image:Helsinki center evening.jpg|Central Helsinki in evening.



*Automated Vacuum Collection (AVAC)
*Declaration of Helsinki
*Helsinki Accords
*Subdivisions of Helsinki




* Hel.fi – Official PC website (in English; other languages available)
* Helsinki.mobi – Official mobile website
* Helsinki.fi – City Portal
* 
* Discover the Baltic, Helsinki section – part of a site for cruise and ferry passengers

* Printed weekly in English, HelsinkiTimes.info
* Helsinki City Geographic Information system
* Tramway in Helsinki
* Helsinki Times











































